warning: The `fitz` API is deprecated and will be removed in future. Use `import pymupdf` instead.
URL: https://aclanthology.org/2026.tacl-1.14.pdf
Type: PDF
Pattern: less toxic models|encode more information|intervention|model quantization (13 matches in 75926 chars)

--- Content ---

1400:... they generate
less toxic output when strongly encoding
information about the input toxicity. We
also highlight the heterogeneity of toxicity,
as model behavior and internals vary across
unique attributes such as Threat. Finally,
four case studies analyzing detoxification,
multi-prompt evaluations, model quantization,
and pre-training dynamics underline the prac-
tical impact of aligned probing with further
concrete insights. Our findings contribute
to a more holistic understanding of LMs,
both within and beyond the context of toxicity.
alignedprobing.github.io
1
Introduction
Language models (LMs) may produce t...
--
5874:...s findings that localize toxicity in upper layers
(Lee et al., 2024). We also find that LMs replicate
and amplify toxicity more than humans as they
strongly encode input toxicity, especially when
focused on single words like Profanities.
Next, we analyze individual LMs in detail (§ 5)
and find that less toxic models encode more infor-
mation about input toxicity. We further establish
that this is a causal relationship (§ 6), showing
that LMs are generally less toxic when they
know more about the toxicity of a given in-
put. Finally, four case studies (§ 7) reveal that
toxicity-related internal representations ...
--
6829:...model behavior and
internals for any textual property.
2. We comprehensively study toxicity with 20
contemporary LMs.
3. We
provide
in-depth
practical
insights
by comparing different LMs, multi-prompt
evaluations, pre-training dynamics, detoxi-
fication via direct preference optimization
(DPO), and model quantization.
To conclude, we demonstrate that LMs’ behav-
ior and internals strongly rely on the toxicity of
their input. Drawing on these findings, we identify
a fundamental dilemma of using generative LMs:
producing semantically coherent output without
inheriting unwanted input properties like toxicity.
2
Al...
--
31030:...e, we find that they exhibit similar encod-
ing patterns in lower layers but diverge in upper
layers (Figure 7). Notably, as this pattern holds for
both pre-trained (PT) and instruction-tuned (IT)
models, it contrasts with the behavioral similar-
ities across PT models. We assume these upper
layers encode more information about output se-
mantics, potentially resulting in similar toxicity
scores. Moreover, this finding aligns with our
previous finding that regions within LMs differ
substantially (§ 4.2).
Focusing on individual LMs reveals further
model-specific insights. Llama-2 encodes toxic-
ity less strongly and ...
--
32683:...ers, which focus more on lexical
features.
Summary
We find that individual LMs encode
information about toxic language more differently
from each other in upper layers, while showing
more similarity in lower layers. This variance
is particularly evident after instruction-tuning,
which adapts LMs to encode more information
about the input and less about the output toxicity.
5.3
Interplay of Internals and Behavior
Finally, we correlate the average information
strength at each layer with the resulting output
toxicity (EMT) across different LMs. As shown
in Figure 8, less toxic LMs tend to encode more
information about ...
--
33761:...
6
Correlation or Causation?
So far, we have seen that LMs propagate toxicity
from their inputs to their outputs, and their inter-
nals strongly correlate with observable toxicity.
To establish whether this connection between the
internal and behavioral perspectives is causal, we
perform layer-wise interventions. Specifically, we
measure model toxicity when skipping one layer
Figure 9: Overview of the layer-wise intervention to
examine how information within single layers im-
pact subsequent toxicity. LM toxicity increases when
skipping a layer, hinting that information about toxic
language helps to produ...
--
[7 more matches not shown]
