warning: The `fitz` API is deprecated and will be removed in future. Use `import pymupdf` instead.
URL: https://aclanthology.org/2026.tacl-1.14.pdf
Type: PDF
Length: 75926 chars (truncated)

--- Content ---

Aligned Probing: Relating Toxic Behavior and Model Internals
Andreas Waldis∗1,2, Vagrant Gautam3, Anne Lauscher4,
Dietrich Klakow3, Iryna Gurevych1
1Ubiquitous Knowledge Processing Lab (UKP Lab), Technical University of Darmstadt, Germany
2Information Systems Research Lab, Lucerne University of Applied Sciences and Arts, Switzerland
3Spoken Language Systems, Saarland University, Germany
4Data Science Group, University of Hamburg, Germany
www.ukp.tu-darmstadt.de
www.hslu.ch
Abstract
Warning: This paper contains offensive text.
We
introduce
aligned
probing,
a
novel
interpretability framework that aligns the
behavior of language models (LMs), based on
their outputs, and their internal representations
(internals). Using this framework, we examine
over 20 OLMo, Llama, and Mistral models,
bridging behavioral and internal perspectives
for toxicity for the first time. Our results show
that LMs strongly encode information about
the toxicity level of inputs and subsequent
outputs, particularly in lower layers. Focusing
on how unique LMs differ offers both correl-
ative and causal evidence that they generate
less toxic output when strongly encoding
information about the input toxicity. We
also highlight the heterogeneity of toxicity,
as model behavior and internals vary across
unique attributes such as Threat. Finally,
four case studies analyzing detoxification,
multi-prompt evaluations, model quantization,
and pre-training dynamics underline the prac-
tical impact of aligned probing with further
concrete insights. Our findings contribute
to a more holistic understanding of LMs,
both within and beyond the context of toxicity.
alignedprobing.github.io
1
Introduction
Language models (LMs) may produce toxic text
that contains hate speech, insults, or vulgar-
ity, even when prompted with innocuous text
(Gehman et al., 2020; de Wynter et al., 2024).
Preventing the generation of such toxic language
is an important part of making LMs safer to use
(Kumar et al., 2023). Efforts in this direction in-
clude analyzing the toxicity of model generations
(Ousidhoum et al., 2021; Hartvigsen et al., 2022),
∗Corresponding author: andreas.waldis@live.com.
the effects of pre-training data (Groeneveld et al.,
2024; Longpre et al., 2024), and model detoxifica-
tion (Lee et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024; Yang et al.,
2024). However, the scope of such work is limited
as they mostly focus on the behavior (Chang and
Bergen, 2024) of models based on their outputs,
ignoring the model-internal perspective (Hu and
Levy, 2023; Waldis et al., 2024b; Mosbach et al.,
2024), and they treat toxic language as homoge-
neous rather than diverse (Pachinger et al., 2023;
Wen et al., 2023). Thus, we lack a methodological
framework to answer the question:
How do LMs encode information about
toxicity, and what is the interplay
between their internals and behavior?
We address this gap by introducing aligned
probing (Figure 1), a novel interpretability frame-
work (§ 2) that aligns model behavior with
internals for toxicity. First, we prompt LMs with
inputs and assess the toxicity of their generated
outputs. During this forward pass, we extract
internal representations to analyze how models
encode toxic language. Specifically, we extract
the hidden states at each model layer and aver-
age them for all input and output tokens. Then,
we use linear probing (Tenney et al., 2019a;
Belinkov, 2022) to estimate the encoded infor-
mation about the toxicity of the input or output.
As we train linear models (probes) with limited
capacity and rigorously validate them (Hewitt and
Liang, 2019; Voita and Titov, 2020), their ability
to estimate toxicity based on internal effects effec-
tively approximates information strength. Finally,
we relate the behavioral and internal perspectives,
examining their interplay.
To account for the heterogeneity of toxic lan-
guage, we consider six fine-grained attributes
(§ 3) and show their varying dependence on
271
Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 14, pp. 271–291, 2026. https://doi.org/10.1162/TACL.a.613
Action Editor: Asli Celikyilmaz. Submission batch: 2/2025; Revision batch: 8/2025; Published 4/2026.
c⃝2026 Association for Computational Linguistics. Distributed under a CC-BY 4.0 license.

Figure 1: Overview of how aligned probing relates model behavior and their internals regarding toxicity. a) We
study the behavior of models by evaluating the toxicity of model inputs and outputs (tI and tO) regarding six
fine-grained toxicity attributes from the PERSPECTIVE API. b) We extract the average internal representations
(internals) of input (hI) and output tokens (hO) at every model layer. Then, we probe how strong these internals
encode input and output toxicity (tI and tO) using four scenarios (Input, Forward, Output, and Backward).
c) We correlate these two perspectives to analyze the interplay of behavior and internals when it comes to toxicity.
specific words. For example, Threats rely on
context, while Sexually Explicit toxicity is fo-
cused on individual words. Using aligned probing
and the RealToxicPrompts dataset (Gehman et al.,
2020), we evaluate 20+ popular pre-trained and
instruction-tuned LMs, including Llama, OLMo,
and Mistral. We also conduct 100K+ probing
runs to assess model internals, and then systemat-
ically analyze the interplay between behavior and
internals.
We first examine high-level insights across LMs
(§ 4), and show that LMs strongly encode infor-
mation about the toxicity of text in lower layers.
This provides an alternative perspective to previ-
ous findings that localize toxicity in upper layers
(Lee et al., 2024). We also find that LMs replicate
and amplify toxicity more than humans as they
strongly encode input toxicity, especially when
focused on single words like Profanities.
Next, we analyze individual LMs in detail (§ 5)
and find that less toxic models encode more infor-
mation about input toxicity. We further establish
that this is a causal relationship (§ 6), showing
that LMs are generally less toxic when they
know more about the toxicity of a given in-
put. Finally, four case studies (§ 7) reveal that
toxicity-related internal representations are sig-
nificantly pruned by DPO detoxification, remain
stable across prompt paraphrasing and model
quantization, and emerge early in pre-training.
Our work thus makes the following methodolog-
ical and empirical contributions to toxicity and
interpretability research:
1. We introduce a novel framework to analyze
the interplay between model behavior and
internals for any textual property.
2. We comprehensively study toxicity with 20
contemporary LMs.
3. We
provide
in-depth
practical
insights
by comparing different LMs, multi-prompt
evaluations, pre-training dynamics, detoxi-
fication via direct preference optimization
(DPO), and model quantization.
To conclude, we demonstrate that LMs’ behav-
ior and internals strongly rely on the toxicity of
their input. Drawing on these findings, we identify
a fundamental dilemma of using generative LMs:
producing semantically coherent output without
inheriting unwanted input properties like toxicity.
2
Aligned Probing
We introduce aligned probing, an interpretability
framework that explicitly aligns model behavior
and internals to examine their interplay in the
context of toxic language. We first evaluate the
behavior of LMs (§ 2.1), based on the toxicity
scores (tI and tO) of the input (I) and the cor-
responding output (O). Next, we analyze how
strongly LMs encode information about these tox-
icity scores within their internal representations
of the input (hI) and output (hO), extracted
during generation (§ 2.2). Finally, we correlate
the resulting information strength (s) with model
behavior to investigate their interplay (§ 2.3).
While this study focuses on toxic text, language
that likely makes people leave a discussion, the
method we present (aligned probing) general-
izes to any textual property describing the input
and/or output.
272

2.1
Evaluating Model Behavior
In toxicity research, language model behavior is
analyzed via the toxicity of generations. Given the
serious implications of toxic language in genera-
tions, the standard evaluation protocol considers
multiple outputs (Oj ∈O) for a single input (I) to
capture the model’s worst-case behavior (Gehman
et al., 2020; Jain et al., 2024; Gallegos et al., 2024).
Following this approach, we generate 25 samples
per input using a temperature of 1.0 and nucleus
sampling with p = 0.9 (Holtzman et al., 2020).
We then evaluate the toxicity of these generations
using the PERSPECTIVE API,1 a widely used
industry standard for toxicity assessment (Wen
et al., 2023; Liang et al., 2023; Groeneveld et al.,
2024). With these toxicity scores, we compute two
metrics:
Expected
Maximum
Toxicity
(EMT)
We
compute the maximum toxicity across multiple
generations for a given input (maxOj∈O tOj).
Since EMT captures the model’s worst-case
behavior, it answers: How toxic is a language
model?
Toxicity Correlation (TC)
We compute the
Pearson correlation between the toxicity scores
of the input (tI) and the corresponding model tox-
icity (EMT ). This metric quantifies how input
toxicity relates to generation toxicity, to answer
the question: Do models replicate input toxicity?
2.2
Evaluating Model Internals
To evaluate how models encode information about
toxicity, we extract the hidden states (h[l]) aver-
aged across all input (I) and output tokens (O) at
every model layer l. We then adopt the probing
classifier methodology (Tenney et al., 2019a,b;
Belinkov, 2022) to assess how these these in-
ternals (h[l]) linearly map to the corresponding
toxicity scores (t):
f : h[l] −→t
(1)
Concretely, we first train2 a probe f (linear model)
to predict ˆt from h[l], where the prediction follows:
ˆt = f(h[l])
(2)
We then approximate the encoding strength (s) as
the Pearson correlation between the predicted (ˆt)
1https://perspectiveapi.com.
2For details on training, see Appendix § A.1.
and actual (t) toxicity scores. Since the learning
capacity of the probe f is limited, a high corre-
lation suggests that substantial information about
toxicity is encoded in h[l], while a low correlation
indicates weaker encoding.
Using this method, we formulate four scenarios
(Figure 1) to analyze the encoding of input and
output toxicity (tI and tO) within the averaged
input and output internals (h[l]
I and h[l]
O):
Scenario Input
f : h[l]
I −→tI
We first assess how strongly an LM encodes the
toxicity of the input within its internals. Thus,
we probe how strongly the input internals (h[l]
I )
encode information about the input toxicity score
(tI), yielding the information strength sInp.
Scenario Forward
f : h[l]
O −→tI
Secondly, we examine how much information
about the input’s toxicity is forwarded and re-
tained during generation. To quantify this, we
measure the information strength sF or by prob-
ing whether the input toxicity score (tI) is encoded
within the internals of the output (h[l]
O).
Scenario Output
f : h[l]
O −→tO
The third scenario assesses how much information
LMs encode about the toxicity of their generations.
Thus, we measure the information strength sOut
by probing whether the output toxicity score (tO)
is reflected in the output internals (h[l]
O).
Scenario Backward
f : h[l]
I −→EMT
Finally, we analyze how much information about
output toxicity an LM encodes within its internal
representations of the input, i.e., we measure the
information strength sBack by probing whether
the model’s internal representations of the input
(h[l]
I ) strongly encode the aggregated expected
maximum toxicity score (EMT) of generations.
2.3
The Interplay of Behavior and Internals
Since we analyze both model behavior and
information strength within internal represen-
tations for the same toxicity attributes, we
can address: How are the internals of models
related to their behavior? To quantify this in-
terplay, we examine the relationship between
information strength in different probing sce-
narios (si ∈{sInp, sF or, sOut, sBack}) and
the model’s toxicity. For instance, if we aim to
investigate how strongly the encoding of input
273

Attribute (a)
Example Prompt
Avg. tI
tI × t[a]
C
General Toxicity
I would rather kill them ...
0.19
ρ = −0.03
Profanity
It’s damn easy to sculpt test ...
0.12
ρ = −0.04
Insult
Incredibly racist and stupid man ...
0.10
ρ = −0.03
Sexually Explicit
My butt muscles are so tight ...
0.08
ρ = 0.17
Identity Attack
If you are white trash ...
0.06
ρ = 0.19
Threat
If you want to kill ...
0.04
ρ = 0.18
Table 1: Examples of the considered fine-grained
toxic attributes along with the average toxicity
scores (tI) and how these scores correlate with
those from the subsequent continuations (tI×tC).
toxicity within input internals (Scenario Input)
relates to model behavior, we compute the Pearson
correlation between the information strength val-
ues across models (−−→
sInp) and their corresponding
expected maximum toxicity scores (
−−−→
EMT ):
−−→
sInp ×
−−−→
EMT
(3)
3
Toxic Language
Following Gehman et al. (2020), we define toxic
text as text which makes people leave a discussion
with high probability. As toxicity is a heteroge-
neous phenomenon, we focus on six fine-grained
attributes: General Toxicity, Identity Attack, In-
sult, Profanity, Threat, and Sexually Explicit. We
quantitatively demonstrate how these attributes
capture distinct aspects of toxic language as
their score distributions (§ 3.2) and sensitivity
to specific tokens (§ 3.3) vary substantially.
3.1
Data
We use the RealToxicPrompts dataset (Gehman
et al., 2020) for our analysis and subsequent exper-
iments. This dataset consists of text prompts (I)
paired with corresponding continuations (C), each
annotated with toxicity scores obtained from the
PERSPECTIVE API. We carefully subsample
the original 100K samples to optimize computa-
tional efficiency while maintaining validity, i.e.,
we iteratively reduce the dataset size as long as the
toxicity scores for all attributes (a) do not differ
statistically significantly (p < 0.05) from the full
dataset. Following this procedure, our final subset
consists of 22K samples.
3.2
Score Distribution
We analyze the score distribution of unique tox-
icity attributes (a ∈A) within our subset of the
RealToxicPrompts dataset. Among all attributes,
we find the highest average score for General
Figure 2: Overview of how the toxicity scores of the
considered attributes correlate with each other.
Toxicity (0.19), suggesting that this attribute is
the most sensitive to the PERSPECTIVE API
scoring. The average score gradually decreases
from Profanity (0.12) to Threat, which has the
lowest average score (0.04). Additionally, toxic-
ity scores of prompts (tI) and their continuations
(tC) marginally correlate, with ρ = 0.02 on av-
erage. Thus, the toxicity scores of the prompt and
continuation seem unrelated on average, as also
shown in Gehman et al. (2020). However, compar-
ing unique toxicity attributes reveals that toxicity
scores tend to be replicated within the continu-
ation for Sexually Explicit (ρ = 0.17), Identity
Attack (ρ = 0.19), and Threat (ρ = 0.18).
Analyzing the relation among toxicity scores
of unique attributes shows strong correlations
across General Toxicity, Profanity, and Insult
(see Figure 2). In contrast, Threat, Identity Attack,
and Sexually Explicit weakly correlate with others.
This shows that these scores are complementary
and offer a distinct perspective on toxicity.
3.3
Word Sensitivity
We quantify the sensitivity of different toxicity
attributes (a ∈A) to individual words. To this
end, we retrieve the toxicity scores of a prompt (I)
and separately compute scores for its constituent
words {w1, . . . , w|I|}. We then define the word
sensitivity for a given attribute a as the difference
between the toxicity score of the prompt (t[a]
I ) and
the toxicity score of its most toxic word:
ζ[a] = max
w∈I t[a]
w −t[a]
I
(4)
A high word sensitivity score (ζ[a]) indicates that
attribute a is particularly dependent on individual,
presumably explicit, words. Conversely, a low or
274

Figure 3: Comparison of the word sensitivity for the
different toxicity attributes. A positive value suggests
that the toxicity of an attribute stems more from a single
words, such as Sexually Explicit. In contrast, a negative
value hints that the toxicity arise from the context as a
whole text has higher scores than single words, as for
the attribute Identity Attack.
negative ζ[a] suggests that the attribute captures
more contextualized forms of toxic language.
We calculate this word sensitivity for every at-
tribute using all prompts of our dataset. Following
Figure 3, General Toxicity, Profanity, and Sexu-
ally Explicit are more sensitivity to single word as
the average ζ[a] is positive. In contrast, attributes
such as Insult, Identity Attack, and Threat have
word sensitivity scores centered around zero or
negative values, indicating a stronger dependence
on the context of a text. The high variance in Gen-
eral Toxicity suggests that it captures a broader
spectrum of toxic language, whereas attributes like
Sexually Explicit represent more narrowly defined
categories. Together with our toxicity score dis-
tribution analysis, these insights further highlight
the heterogeneous nature of toxic language.
4
Toxicity of Language Models
In this section, we apply aligned probing to
comprehensively evaluate LMs in the context of
toxicity. We begin by discussing the toxicity of
LM generations (§ 4.1), after which we turn to how
models encode and propagate information about
toxic language internally (§ 4.2). Finally, we con-
nect our behavioral and model-internal insights
and study their interplay (§ 4.3).
Setup
We present results aggregated across six
popular pre-trained LMs with 7B to 8B parameters
from the OLMo, Llama, and Mistral families. See
Table 4 in the Appendix for more details.
Max. Tox. (EMT [a])
Tox. Corr. (TC)
Attribute
Toxic
Not Toxic
Toxic
Not Toxic
Average
0.61+0.27
0.25−0.03
0.27+0.30
0.40+0.32
General Toxicity
0.67+0.35
0.38−0.01
0.30+0.35
0.42+0.38
Profanity
0.63+0.36
0.24−0.06
0.26+0.28
0.40+0.42
Insult
0.57+0.29
0.27−0.03
0.22+0.32
0.40+0.41
Sexually Explicit
0.67+0.28
0.20−0.04
0.34+0.27
0.43+0.30
Identity Attack
0.55+0.20
0.18−0.02
0.24+0.25
0.24+0.26
Threat
0.54+0.13
0.20−0.08
0.25+0.36
0.33+0.15
Table 2: Toxicity measures on average and regard-
ing the specific toxicity attributes (a) for toxic
(tI ≥0.5) and not toxic (tI < 0.5) examples
aggregated across the six evaluated LMs. Num-
bers in subscript show how the toxicity of these
LMs deviates from human behavior. Namely, the
difference between EMT and the toxicity of the
original continuation (tC) and between the tox-
icity correlation and the correlation between the
toxicity of the prompt and continuation (tI ×tC).
4.1
Behavioral Evaluation
We begin by analyzing the toxicity of LMs
based on their generated text. Overall, our results
(Table 2) align with previous work (Gehman et al.,
2020) as LMs generally generate text with substan-
tial toxicity, with EMT of 0.61 for toxic and 0.25
for not toxic prompts. Similar to Jain et al. (2024),
we find that the input toxicity moderately cor-
relates with the subsequent output toxicity (TC),
demonstrating how LMs replicate input properties.
Below, we detail our main findings:
i)
LMs
replicate
and
amplify
toxicity
more
than
human
language.
We
com-
pare model-generated continuations (tO) with
naturally occurring continuations from the Real-
ToxicPrompts dataset (tC) to analyze differences
in toxic language between LMs and human
language. Our results show that models generate
more toxic text than humans do, particularly for
toxic prompts, where we observe an increase of
+0.27 in EMT. Furthermore, LM generations
replicate input toxicity levels beyond those
found in human language. Interestingly, this
deviation from human language is similar for both
toxic (+0.30) and not toxic (+0.32) prompts,
suggesting
that
LMs
exhibit
fundamentally
different behavior from humans, regardless of
input toxicity.
ii) LMs are more toxic when single words con-
vey toxicity.
We observe that toxicity levels
of LMs vary across the six fine-grained toxic-
ity attributes we consider (Table 2). LMs exhibit
275

Figure 4: Results of the four defined scenarios for aligned probing input (t[a]
I ) and output (t[a]
O ) toxicity, averaged
across the six evaluated LMs and the six toxicity attributes. Error bands show the standard deviation across folds
and seeds, and we report the maximum information for the lower, middle, and upper layers.
particularly high toxicity and strongly replicate
input toxicity for attributes sensitive to single
words (high ζ in Figure 3). This effect is most
pronounced for Sexually Explicit toxic prompts,
which show the highest toxicity levels, with EMT
and TC scores of 0.67 and 0.34, respectively.
In contrast, LMs generate less toxic output and
replicate input toxicity to a lesser extent for more
context-dependent attributes like Threat and In-
sult. Additionally, we find that the gap between
LMs and human behavior is larger for toxicity
that is more explicit (e.g., +0.36 for Profan-
ity), compared to diffuse attributes like Threat
(+0.13).
Summary
Our analysis shows that LMs not
only replicate but also amplify the toxicity of
input prompts, particularly for attributes highly
sensitive to single words. This difference among
unique types of toxicity demonstrates that LM
behavior is as heterogeneous as these attributes
themselves.
4.2
Internal Evaluation
Now that we have analyzed LM behavior, we turn
to how they encode toxic language internally.
iii) Toxic language is encoded in lower lay-
ers.
Figure 4 illustrates how strongly (lines) and
consistently (bands) LMs encode the toxicity of
text based on the average and standard devia-
tion across 20 probes covering multiple folds and
seeds. We observe three-stages: (1) information
emerges and peaks in the first third of model
layers, (2) gradually declines in the middle third,
and (3) continues decreasing in later layers while
standard deviation increases. Notably, the stan-
dard deviation (bands) reveals differences even
in layers with similar information strength, such
as layer one and layer 23, which exhibit devia-
tions of ±0.006 and ±0.038, respectively. We
validate these insights with alternative probing
metrics, namely, selectivity (Hewitt and Liang,
Figure 5: Maximum information level for lower, mid-
dle, and upper layers regarding the difference toxicity
attributes by probing scenarios. The error bar shows
deviation across four folds and five seeds.
2019) and compression (Voita and Titov, 2020)—
see Figure 17 and Figure 16 in the Appendix. With
these findings, we offer an alternative perspective
on toxicity in LMs, one that differs from localizing
it in the upper layer by projecting hidden states to
specific output vocabulary (Lee et al., 2024). In-
stead, our results suggest that lower model layers
compute rich latent information while the upper
layers then project this information to text, natu-
rally affected by information diminishing due to
the large discrete output space (vocabulary). Since
the meaning attached to these tokens does not nec-
essarily represent internal information (Shojaee
et al., 2025; Hewitt et al., 2025; Kambhampati
et al., 2025), supplementary evaluations focusing
on latent encoded information are indispensable.
iv) Information strength varies by toxicity at-
tribute.
We further analyze how the encoding
of toxic language differs across specific toxicity
attributes. As shown in Figure 5, LMs encode less
information for contextualized attributes, such as
Threat, while attributes with higher word sensi-
tivity, like General Toxicity, are more strongly
276

encoded. This observation aligns with prior work
(Warstadt et al., 2020; Waldis et al., 2024b), which
found that LMs encode word-level properties,
such as morphology, more strongly than con-
textual information. Interestingly, the maximum
information strength for contextualized attributes
occurs in higher layers, such as layer 7 for Identity
Attack. In contrast, attributes sensitive to single
words, such as Sexually Explicit, peak in lower lay-
ers, which probably capture such surface features
(Tenney et al., 2019a; Niu et al., 2022).
v) LMs know more about input toxicity
and propagate this information.
Our analysis
(Figure 4) shows that LMs encode more informa-
tion about input toxicity (tI) than output toxicity
(tO). This information strength reaches up to 0.83
in the Input scenario and 0.73 in Forward,
while it is lower for output toxicity, with a maxi-
mum of 0.72 in Output and 0.67 in Backward.
These findings build on previous work (West et al.,
2024) and suggest that LMs struggle to internalize
the meaning of their outputs to toxicity.
At the same time, our results show that LMs
not only encode input toxicity strongly in input
internals (hI) but also transfer this information
to generation internals (hO). This is particularly
clear when comparing the Forward and Output
scenarios, where input toxicity (tI) is encoded al-
most as strongly as output toxicity (tO) in the
output internals. Additionally, the delayed rise of
tI information in output internals supports this
transfer: It takes six layers to exceed an informa-
tion strength of 0.60 in the Forward scenario,
indicating that LMs gradually pass this infor-
mation through the attention mechanism. This
confirms that LMs entangle their generations with
input toxicity, emphasizing the need to understand
better how toxicity is encoded and transferred
within models.
Summary
Our insights reveal that model inter-
nals strongly encode toxic language, especially
input toxicity, and attribute sensitivity to single
words. Additionally, model layers vary in in-
formation strength, clarity, and the encoding of
unique toxicity attributes.
4.3
Correlation of Internals and Behavior
Connecting our behavioral and internal evalua-
tions, we show that information strength is closely
related to observable toxicity when comparing
distinct toxicity attributes. Figure 6 demonstrates
Figure 6: Layer-wise correlation (×) between the be-
havior of models regarding the six toxicity attributes
and the corresponding information levels in our four
probing scenarios.
that model toxicity for specific attributes (a) in-
creases when their internals (hI, hO) encode more
information about a. This correlation is stronger
in the Input, Forward, and Output scenar-
ios, reaching up to ρ = 0.81, ρ = 0.77, and
ρ = 0.77, respectively, while it is lower for
Backward (ρ = 0.69). These findings suggest
that encoding input and output toxicity for a
specific attribute (a) more strongly increases
the model toxicity related to a.
5
Comparing Language Models
After evaluating toxicity in general, we next ex-
amine how individual models differ. In § 5.1, we
discuss insights about how the behavior of specific
LMs varies, with a particular focus on the effects
of instruction tuning. We then present findings on
how internals differ (§ 5.2) and finally analyze the
interplay between model internals and behavior
across distinct LMs (§5.3).
Setup
We evaluate pre-trained and instruction-
tuned versions of the following popular con-
temporary models: OLMo, OLMo-2, Llama-2,
Llama-3, Llama-3.1, and Mistral-v0.3.3 With each
model, we discuss results averaged across the six
fine-grained toxicity attributes.
5.1
Behavioral Evaluation
We first analyze how the behavior of unique
models differs in the context of toxicity, with a
focus on how instruction-tuning changes LMs.
i) Instruction-tuning diversifies LMs.
Com-
paring LMs reveals only minor differences in
toxicity among pre-trained LMs (see Table 6 of
3See Table 4 of the Appendix for details.
277

Max. Tox. (EMT)
Tox. Corr. (TC)
Language Model
Toxic
Not Toxic
Toxic
Not Toxic
Avg. Pre-Trained (PT)
0.62+0.28
0.25−0.03
0.29+0.33
0.41+0.33
Avg. Instruction-Tuned (IT)
0.33+0.01
0.09−0.19
0.11+0.15
0.52+0.44
Table 3: Toxicity measures averaged regarding
the model type (pre-trained or instruction-tuned).
The numbers in the subscript show how the toxic
substances deviate from human language.
the Appendix). Notably, OLMo exhibits the lowest
toxicity, highlighting the effectiveness of carefully
curated, detoxified pre-training data (Groeneveld
et al., 2024). In contrast, instruction-tuned LMs
show more behavioral variation, especially for
toxic prompts. These differences are particularly
pronounced for LMs presumably trained on dis-
tinct instruction corpora, such as Llama-2-Chat
and OLMo-Instruct. As these results underline the
impact of pre-training and instruction-tuning data,
only releasing these corpora would allow us to
examine LMs and their limitations holistically.
ii) Instruction-tuning mitigates toxicity.
Con-
sistent with Jain et al. (2024), instruction-tuned
(IT) LMs exhibit lower toxicity than pre-trained
(PT) ones, with an EMT of 0.33 for toxic
prompts
and
0.09
for
not
toxic
prompts
(see Table 3). In fact, the toxicity of IT LMs is
more closely aligned with the toxicity of human
language for toxic prompts (+0.01) while being
lower (−0.19) for not toxic prompts. Analyzing
the correlation with input toxicity (TC) reveals
that IT models effectively suppress high input
toxicity (0.11 for toxic prompts) while preserving
the low toxicity of not toxic prompts (0.55).
Since IT LMs frequently generate phrases like
as a helpful assistant, this mitigation effect may
partly stem from such formulations. Re-evaluating
generations without such phrases results in a
slight increase in toxicity (see Figure 10 in
the Appendix). However, their toxicity remains
lower than pre-trained LMs, demonstrating that
instruction-tuning reduces LM toxicity without
explicit objectives beyond exposure to presumably
not toxic preference data. Interestingly, this adap-
tation appears more implicit, as toxicity mitigation
is particularly pronounced for more contextually
nuanced attributes such as Threat.
Summary
These insights show that instruction-
tuning effectively mitigates toxic language, and
this subsequent stage, after pre-training, shapes
behavioral differences across unique models.
Figure 7: Comparison of how pre-trained (PT) and
instruction-tuned (IT) models encode toxic language
for the four scenarios. The colored area shows how
unique LMs (like Llama, OLMo, or Mistral) deviate
when pre-trained or instruction-tuned.
5.2
Internal Evaluation
Next, we analyze how LMs encode toxic lan-
guage differently, grouped by whether they are
just pre-trained or also instruction-tuned.
iii) LMs differ in how they encode toxicity in
upper layers.
Analyzing how LMs encode toxic
language, we find that they exhibit similar encod-
ing patterns in lower layers but diverge in upper
layers (Figure 7). Notably, as this pattern holds for
both pre-trained (PT) and instruction-tuned (IT)
models, it contrasts with the behavioral similar-
ities across PT models. We assume these upper
layers encode more information about output se-
mantics, potentially resulting in similar toxicity
scores. Moreover, this finding aligns with our
previous finding that regions within LMs differ
substantially (§ 4.2).
Focusing on individual LMs reveals further
model-specific insights. Llama-2 encodes toxic-
ity less strongly and with higher variability than
Llama-3 and Llama-3.1, likely due to its smaller
pre-training dataset (2T vs. 15T+ tokens). Mean-
while, OLMo exhibits high information strength
and low variance, another sign of the high quality
of its pre-training data.
iv) Instruction-tuned LMs encode more in-
formation about input toxicity.
We compare
PT
and IT
LMs to assess the impact of
instruction-tuning on model internals. As shown
in Figure 7, instruction-tuning increases the infor-
mation strength for input toxicity while reducing
it for output toxicity, particularly in the For-
ward and Backward scenarios and in upper
layers. Interestingly, the difference between PT
278

Figure 8: Layer-wise correlation (×) of the toxicity of
LMs and the average information strength.
and IT LMs is stronger for toxicity attributes that
are less sensitive to individual words, especially
Threat and Insult. These findings suggest that
instruction-tuning primarily affects upper layers,
which encode broader linguistic context, rather
than lower layers, which focus more on lexical
features.
Summary
We find that individual LMs encode
information about toxic language more differently
from each other in upper layers, while showing
more similarity in lower layers. This variance
is particularly evident after instruction-tuning,
which adapts LMs to encode more information
about the input and less about the output toxicity.
5.3
Interplay of Internals and Behavior
Finally, we correlate the average information
strength at each layer with the resulting output
toxicity (EMT) across different LMs. As shown
in Figure 8, less toxic LMs tend to encode more
information about input toxicity, particularly in
the Forward scenario and for toxic prompts
(ρ = −0.89). Conversely, these less-toxic LMs
encode less information about output toxicity, es-
pecially in the Backward scenario, where we
observe ρ = 0.71 for toxic prompts. These find-
ings suggest that models are generally less toxic
when they know more about input toxicity, partic-
ularly for attributes with higher word sensitivity,
such as Sexually Explicit or Profanity.
6
Correlation or Causation?
So far, we have seen that LMs propagate toxicity
from their inputs to their outputs, and their inter-
nals strongly correlate with observable toxicity.
To establish whether this connection between the
internal and behavioral perspectives is causal, we
perform layer-wise interventions. Specifically, we
measure model toxicity when skipping one layer
Figure 9: Overview of the layer-wise intervention to
examine how information within single layers im-
pact subsequent toxicity. LM toxicity increases when
skipping a layer, hinting that information about toxic
language helps to produce less toxic text.
at a time, approximating the impact of informa-
tion encoded at that layer. As these experiments
are computationally expensive, we focus on the
pre-trained OLMo model and focus on layers 2
to 10, which encode toxic language particularly
strongly.
As Figure 9 shows, removing information by
skipping model layers generally increases the tox-
icity of generated text. Specifically, we observe an
average increase of +2.0 in maximum expected
toxicity (EMT) across all intervened layers, with
a peak of +6.2 for layer 7. Relating this to our
internal analysis, layer 7 strongly encodes input
toxicity in both the input and output. Comparing
the results for different toxicity attributes, we con-
firm that the interplay between model internals
and behavior varies across distinct attributes. As
shown in § 5.3, this interplay is stronger for explicit
attributes, where we observe a more pronounced
causal effect. Specifically, removing information
causes up to +16.0 more toxicity for Profanity.
In contrast, more contextualized attributes, such
as Threat, exhibit only a minor increase.
These findings extend previous insights and
suggest
information
about
input
toxicity
causally enables language models to generate
less toxic text. At the same time, these insights
underscore the importance of studying causal
mechanisms of LMs (Saphra and Wiegreffe,
2024), particularly for safety aspects (Bereska
and Gavves, 2024), as LMs vary in how they
process distinct toxicity attributes.
7
Case Studies
Finally, we present four case studies with practi-
cal applications of aligned probing, focusing on
DPO-based detoxification (§ 7.1), multi-prompt
evaluation (§ 7.2), model quantization (§ 7.3), and
pre-training dynamics (§ 7.4).
279

7.1
Case Study: Detoxification
We study how model internals change under DPO
detoxification in Figure 12 of the Appendix. Our
results confirm this method’s effectiveness in re-
ducing the toxicity of LMs (Li et al., 2024).
However, we find a substantial information loss
within the internals of these models, particularly
in the upper layers. As we observe this informa-
tion loss for text properties other than toxicity, like
input length, we see that detoxification via DPO
impacts model internals substantially. Therefore, a
more holistic evaluation is indispensable to quan-
tify what abilities alignment methods remove from
models. As such, aligned models can also easily
be unaligned (Lee et al., 2024).
7.2
Case Study: Multi-Prompt Evaluation
We study how multi-prompt evaluation impacts
the internals and behavior of models by prompt-
ing LMs to complete a given text chunk with four
different prompt formulations—see Figure 13 of
the Appendix. These experiments show that the
toxicity of LMs varies across different prompts,
while model internals remain more stable. These
results expand previous work about the crucial
entanglement of model behavior and specific in-
structions (Mizrahi et al., 2024; Sclar et al., 2024).
Our results show that this variance is visible be-
yond task-specific evaluation, and that, in contrast,
model internals reveal fewer deviations.
7.3
Case Study: Model Quantization
We also study whether evaluating model internals
and behavior vary when we apply quantization
methods to improve efficiency—see Figure 14 of
the Appendix. We find that both behavioral and
internal results remain valid and consistent, as we
found only minor deviations when comparing full
precision with half and four bit precision.
7.4
Case Study: Pre-Training Dynamics
We analyze how model behavior and inter-
nals evolve during pre-training by studying six
pre-training checkpoints of OLMo (Groeneveld
et al., 2024)—see Figure 12 of the Appendix.
These results show that early in training (100K
steps), models are close to their final toxi-
city and information strength regarding toxic
language. Afterward, we mainly see improve-
ments in the clarity of the information strength,
with lower standard deviations across folds and
seeds after 100K steps. These observations sug-
gest that aligned probing can effectively monitor
pre-training dynamics.
8
Related Work
Toxicity of Language Models
Work on lan-
guage
model
toxicity
primarily
focuses
on
evaluating and modifying model behavior by an-
alyzing inputs and outputs (Gallegos et al., 2024).
For instance, Gehman et al. (2020) examine toxi-
city in generations given English prompts, while
de Wynter et al. (2024) and Jain et al. (2024) ex-
tend this to multilingual settings. Wen et al. (2023)
go beyond overt toxicity, investigating implicit
toxicity that is harder for automatic classifiers to
detect. Another line of research explores the ori-
gins of toxicity in LMs by analyzing training data.
Gehman et al. (2020) highlight the prevalence of
toxic content in pre-training corpora, and Longpre
et al. (2024) show that filtering for quality and
toxicity can paradoxically lead to toxic degenera-
tion and poor generalization. Unlike these works,
we comprehensively evaluate LMs by relating the
study of their behavior and model internals, with
different types of toxic language.
Studying
Model
Internals
Recent
inter-
pretability research has begun probing toxicity
within model internals. Ousidhoum et al. (2021)
first explored this by using masked language
models. More recent work analyzes and mitigates
toxicity via model merging (Yang et al., 2024),
DPO (Lee et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024), and
knowledge editing (Wang et al., 2024). Methods
such as linear probing, activation analysis, and
causal interventions have been used to study
toxicity mitigation in both English (Lee et al.,
2024) and multilingual models (Li et al., 2024).
While we adopt similar methods, we contribute
a new framework, aligned probing, to trace
toxicity through model internals, enabling a
deeper understanding of how input toxicity is
entangled with subsequent model behavior.
Probing
Our approach builds on classifier-
based probing, which has been widely stud-
ied (Belinkov, 2022). Probing classifiers can
be difficult to interpret, leading to refinements
such as control tasks (Hewitt and Liang, 2019;
Ravichander et al., 2021), fine-tuning probes
(Mosbach et al., 2020), information-theoretic
280

perspectives (Voita and Titov, 2020), and be-
havioral explanations (Elazar et al., 2021). While
our study focuses on toxicity, probing has been
applied to various linguistic properties, including
negation and function words (Kim et al., 2019),
grammatical number (Lasri et al., 2022), author
demographics (Lauscher et al., 2022), language
identity (Srinivasan et al., 2023), topic classi-
fication (Waldis et al., 2024a), and linguistic
competence (Waldis et al., 2024b).
9
Discussion and Conclusion
We present aligned probing, a method to trace
text properties from the model input to the output
and connect these findings to subsequent behav-
ior. By applying this method in the context of
toxicity, we evaluate over 20 contemporary mod-
els and demonstrate that they substantially encode
information about toxic language, which crucially
impacts the toxicity of model outputs. Moreover,
our results reveal that model behavior strongly
relies on the toxicity of the input, and model
internals strongly encode and propagate informa-
tion about this input toxicity. With this substantial
dependence on the properties of the input text,
we identify a crucial dilemma of generative mod-
els: We expect them to generate a semantically
relevant output given an input prompt without
considering unwanted properties, such as toxicity.
Pursuing this thought towards more controllable
text generation, we plan to apply aligned probing
to analyze other aspects of generation, like stereo-
typical formulations, and examine the nature of
other mitigation methods, such as model merging.
Limitations
Classifying Toxicity
Detecting toxicity is a
non-trivial task as conceptualizations, datasets,
and annotator attitudes can vary widely (Waseem,
2016; Waseem et al., 2017; Sap et al., 2022;
Pachinger et al., 2023; Cercas Curry et al., 2024).
Moreover,
toxicity—as
with
most
linguistic
properties—is highly contextual and can be im-
plicit, making it challenging to detect (Wen et al.,
2023). Even though we consider fine-grained tox-
icity attributes, our use of PERSPECTIVE API4
and probing classifiers may miss forms of toxic-
4An industry standard API providing high performance in
toxicity detection, see results online.
ity not represented in upstream datasets, or exhibit
biases (Nogara et al., 2023; Pozzobon et al., 2023).
Probing Classifiers
This work relies on prob-
ing classifiers to assess the information encoded
within internal representations, but this comes
with methodological constraints. First, we want
the probe to catch relevant patterns in inter-
nal representations of LMs, but it should not
learn nonexistent patterns due to its learning ca-
pabilities. To address this, we use the simplest
possible probe (a linear model without intermedi-
ate layers) and verify the low learning capabilities
with control tasks (Hewitt and Liang, 2019).
Moreover, we validate our probing setup from
an information-theoretic perspective (Voita and
Titov, 2020), thereby confirming our results and
findings. Second, probing is a solely observational
explainability method which does not offer any
insights about causal relations. In other words, just
because a model’s representations are predictive
of a property does not mean that the model is
using it (Ravichander et al., 2021; Elazar et al.,
2021; Belinkov, 2022). We address this limitation
by correlating probing performance with actual
toxic behavior when presenting our results, and
by running interventions to analyze whether corre-
lations are causal. In future applications of aligned
probing to other text properties, it is important to
contextualize results with these checks as we do.
Beyond English Toxicity
Due to space con-
straints, we only demonstrate aligned probing
with English toxicity in this paper. We emphasize
that English toxicity is intended as an exam-
ple, and other English textual properties may be
encoded and propagated differently from input
to output through model internals. Additionally,
evaluations of toxicity in non-English languages
are also influenced by whether the data is local-
ized to linguistically and culturally appropriate
examples and can still be affected by English
pre-training data (Jain et al., 2024).
Acknowledgments
We thank Pia Pachinger, Ilia Kuznetsov, Tim
Baumg¨artner, and Paul R¨ottger for their valuable
feedback and discussions. Andreas Waldis is sup-
ported by Hasler Foundation grant no. 21024. The
work of Anne Lauscher is funded under the Excel-
lence Strategy of the German Federal Government
and States.
281

References
Viraat Aryabumi, John Dang, Dwarak Talupuru,
Saurabh Dash, David Cairuz, Hangyu Lin,
Bharat Venkitesh, Madeline Smith, Jon Ander
Campos, Yi Chern Tan, Kelly Marchisio,
Max Bartolo, Sebastian Ruder, Acyr Locatelli,
Julia Kreutzer, Nick Frosst, Aidan N. Gomez,
Phil Blunsom, Marzieh Fadaee, Ahmet ¨Ust¨un,
and
Sara
Hooker.
2024.
Aya
23:
Open
weight releases to further multilingual progress.
CoRR, abs/2405.15032. https://doi.org
/10.48550/ARXIV.2405.15032
Yonatan Belinkov. 2022. Probing classifiers:
Promises, shortcomings, and advances. Compu-
tational Linguistics, 48(1):207–219. https://
doi.org/10.1162/coli a 00422
Leonard Bereska and Stratis Gavves. 2024. Mech-
anistic interpretability for AI safety – A review.
Transactions on Machine Learning Research.
Amanda Cercas Curry, Gavin Abercrombie, and
Zeerak Talat. 2024. Subjective isms? On
the danger of conflating hate and offence
in abusive language detection. In Proceed-
ings of the 8th Workshop on Online Abuse
and Harms (WOAH 2024), pages 275–282,
Mexico City, Mexico. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics. https://doi.org/10
.18653/v1/2024.woah-1.22
Tyler A. Chang and Benjamin K. Bergen.
2024. Language model behavior: A com-
prehensive survey. Computational Linguis-
tics,
50(1):293–350.
https://doi.org
/10.1162/coli_a_00492
Adrian de Wynter, Ishaan Watts, Nektar Ege
Altintoprak, Tua Wongsangaroonsri, Minghui
Zhang, Noura Farra, Lena Baur, Samantha
Claudet, Pavel Gajdusek, Can G¨oren, Qilong
Gu, Anna Kaminska, Tomasz Kaminski, Ruby
Kuo,
Akiko
Kyuba,
Jongho
Lee,
Kartik
Mathur, Petter Merok, Ivana Milovanovic, Nani
Paananen, Vesa-Matti Paananen, Anna Pavlenko,
Bruno Pereira Vidal, Luciano Strika, Yueh
Tsao, Davide Turcato, Oleksandr Vakhno,
Judit Velcsov, Anna Vickers, St´ephanie Visser,
Herdyan Widarmanto, Andrey Zaikin, and
Si-Qing Chen. 2024. RTP-LX: can llms evalu-
ate toxicity in multilingual scenarios? ArXiv
preprint,
abs/2404.14397.
https://doi
.org/10.1609/aaai.v39i27.35011
Yanai Elazar, Shauli Ravfogel, Alon Jacovi,
and Yoav Goldberg. 2021. Amnesic probing:
Behavioral explanation with amnesic coun-
terfactuals. Transactions of the Association
for
Computational
Linguistics,
9:160–175.
https://doi.org/10.1162/tacl a 00359
Isabel O. Gallegos, Ryan A. Rossi, Joe Barrow,
Md Mehrab Tanjim, Sungchul Kim, Franck
Dernoncourt, Tong Yu, Ruiyi Zhang, and
Nesreen K. Ahmed. 2024. Bias and fairness in
large language models: A survey. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 50(3):1097–1179. https://
doi.org/10.1162/coli a 00524
Samuel Gehman, Suchin Gururangan, Maarten
Sap, Yejin Choi, and Noah A. Smith. 2020.
RealToxicityPrompts: Evaluating neural toxic
degeneration in language models. In Find-
ings of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: EMNLP 2020, pages 3356–3369,
Online. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1
/2020.findings-emnlp.301
Aaron Grattafiori, Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav
Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian,
Ahmad
Al-Dahle,
Aiesha
Letman,
Akhil
Mathur, Alan Schelten, Alex Vaughan, Amy
Yang, Angela Fan, Anirudh Goyal, Anthony
Hartshorn,
Aobo
Yang,
Archi
Mitra,
Archie Sravankumar, Artem Korenev, Arthur
Hinsvark, et al. 2024. The llama 3 herd of
models.
Dirk
Groeneveld,
Iz
Beltagy,
Evan
Walsh,
Akshita
Bhagia,
Rodney
Kinney,
Oyvind
Tafjord, Ananya Jha, Hamish Ivison, Ian
Magnusson, Yizhong Wang, Shane Arora,
David
Atkinson,
Russell
Authur,
Khyathi
Chandu, Arman Cohan, Jennifer Dumas, Yanai
Elazar,
Yuling
Gu,
Jack
Hessel,
Tushar
Khot, William Merrill, Jacob Morrison, Niklas
Muennighoff, Aakanksha Naik, Crystal Nam,
Matthew Peters, Valentina Pyatkin, Abhilasha
Ravichander, Dustin Schwenk, Saurabh Shah,
William
Smith,
Emma
Strubell,
Nishant
Subramani,
Mitchell
Wortsman,
Pradeep
Dasigi, Nathan Lambert, Kyle Richardson,
Luke Zettlemoyer, Jesse Dodge, Kyle Lo,
Luca Soldaini, Noah Smith, and Hannaneh
Hajishirzi. 2024. OLMo: Accelerating the sci-
ence of language models. In Proceedings of
282

the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1:
Long Papers), pages 15789–15809, Bangkok,
Thailand. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1
/2024.acl-long.841
Thomas
Hartvigsen,
Saadia
Gabriel,
Hamid
Palangi, Maarten Sap, Dipankar Ray, and
Ece Kamar. 2022. ToxiGen: A large-scale
machine-generated dataset for adversarial and
implicit hate speech detection. In Proceed-
ings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the
Association
for
Computational
Linguistics
(Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 3309–3326,
Dublin, Ireland. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics. https://doi.org/10
.18653/v1/2022.acl-long.234
John Hewitt, Robert Geirhos, and Been Kim.
2025. We can’t understand AI using our existing
vocabulary.
John Hewitt and Percy Liang. 2019. Designing and
interpreting probes with control tasks. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing and
the 9th International Joint Conference on Nat-
ural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP),
pages 2733–2743, Hong Kong, China. As-
sociation
for
Computational
Linguistics.
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/D19
-1275
Ari Holtzman, Jan Buys, Li Du, Maxwell Forbes,
and Yejin Choi.
