warning: The `fitz` API is deprecated and will be removed in future. Use `import pymupdf` instead.
URL: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2406.05946
Type: PDF
Length: 95445 chars (truncated)

--- Content ---

Safety Alignment Should Be Made
More Than Just a Few Tokens Deep
Xiangyu Qi
Princeton University
xiangyuqi@princeton.edu
Ashwinee Panda
Princeton University
ashwinee@princeton.edu
Kaifeng Lyu
Princeton University
klyu@cs.princeton.edu
Xiao Ma
Google DeepMind
xmaa@google.com
Subhrajit Roy
Google DeepMind
subhrajitroy@google.com
Ahmad Beirami
Google DeepMind
beirami@google.com
Prateek Mittal
Princeton University
pmittal@princeton.edu
Peter Henderson
Princeton University
peter.henderson@princeton.edu
Abstract
The safety alignment of current Large Language Models (LLMs) is vulnerable.
Relatively simple attacks, or even benign fine-tuning, can jailbreak aligned models.
We argue that many of these vulnerabilities are related to a shared underlying
issue: safety alignment can take shortcuts, wherein the alignment adapts a model’s
generative distribution primarily over only its very first few output tokens. We
refer to this issue as shallow safety alignment. In this paper, we present case
studies to explain why shallow safety alignment can exist and provide evidence that
current aligned LLMs are subject to this issue. We also show how these findings
help explain multiple recently discovered vulnerabilities in LLMs, including the
susceptibility to adversarial suffix attacks, prefilling attacks, decoding parameter
attacks, and fine-tuning attacks. Importantly, we discuss how this consolidated
notion of shallow safety alignment sheds light on promising research directions
for mitigating these vulnerabilities. For instance, we show that deepening the
safety alignment beyond just the first few tokens can often meaningfully improve
robustness against some common exploits. We also design a regularized fine-tuning
objective that makes the safety alignment more persistent against fine-tuning attacks
by constraining updates on initial tokens. Overall, we advocate that future safety
alignment should be made more than just a few tokens deep.1
1
Introduction
Currently, the safety of Large Language Models (LLMs) [1–7] heavily hinges on AI alignment
approaches [8–12]—typically a mixture of supervised Fine-tuning (SFT) [13] and preference-based
optimization methods like Reinforcement Learning with Human Feedback (RLHF) [14, 15] and
Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) [16]. These approaches aim to optimize models so that they
refuse to engage with harmful inputs, thus reducing the likelihood of generating harmful content.
However, recent studies find that such alignment approaches suffer from various vulnerabilities.
For example, researchers demonstrate that aligned models can still be made to respond to harmful
requests via adversarially optimized inputs [17–21], a few gradient steps of fine-tuning [22, 23],
1Our code is available at https://github.com/Unispac/shallow-vs-deep-alignment
Preprint. Under review.
arXiv:2406.05946v1  [cs.CR]  10 Jun 2024

or simply exploiting the model’s decoding parameters [24]. Given the pivotal role that alignment
plays in LLM safety, and its widespread adoption, it is imperative to understand why current safety
alignment is so vulnerable to these exploits and to identify actionable approaches to mitigate them.
In this paper, we examine one underlying problem in current safety alignment that may make models
particularly vulnerable to relatively simple exploits: safety alignment is largely only a few tokens
deep, i.e., it adapts the model’s generative distribution primarily over only the very first few output
tokens. Consequently, happening upon, or adversarially induced, if the model’s initial output tokens
deviate from some routine safe prefixes, its generation could catastrophically fall on a harmful
trajectory. For example, consider the scenario where a user asks, “How do I build a bomb?” and
induces the model to begin its response with, “Sure, here’s a detailed guide.” The model is then much
more likely to continue with harmful information responsive to the user’s request. We refer to this
problem as shallow safety alignment (Section 2). We call the counterfactual, where a model can
recover from such harmful starting conditions, deep safety alignment. To provide sufficient context
to this notion, our work has three main contributions.
First, we conduct systematic experiments to characterize the shallow safety alignment issue in current
LLMs (Section 2). We demonstrate that the primary difference in safety behaviors between an aligned
model and its unaligned counterpart lies in their modeling of only the first few tokens of their outputs.2
Part of the problem is that there are easy optimization shortcuts that may drive such a local optimum.
For example, simply prefilling an unaligned base model to start its output with a prefix “I cannot
fulfill” is sufficient to make it as safe as aligned models. We note that the shallow safety alignment
issue helps explain why attack methods that focus on initiating trajectories with harmful or affirmative
responses are so effective, like adversarial suffix attacks [29], decoding parameters exploit [24], and
an emerging paradigm of prefilling attacks [30, 21]. Moreover, we show that fine-tuning attacks [22]
also create the most significant changes in the first few tokens of a harmful response. This means that
by simply modifying these initial tokens, it is possible to undo the model alignment, explaining why
so few fine-tuning steps can lead to jailbroken models.
Second, we argue that future safety alignment approaches should focus on extending their effects
deeper. To support this idea, we introduce a simple data augmentation approach for deepening the
safety alignment (Section 3). By training on safety alignment data that begins with harmful responses
and transitions back to safety refusals, we show it is feasible to increase the divergence between an
aligned model and an unaligned one on the harmful content at greater token depths. Importantly, we
show that such a deeper alignment often leads to stronger robustness against some common exploits.
Third, we show that a constrained optimization objective that focuses on preventing large shifts in
initial token probabilities can mitigate finetuning attacks (Section 4). This highlights potential lines
of defense against fine-tuning attacks, using a better understanding of shallow safety alignment, as
well as provides further evidence of the shallow alignment of current models.
Overall, this work pitches the unifying notion of shallow versus deep safety alignment, demonstrates
that current methods are relatively shallow (leading to a host of known exploits), and provides initial
paths forward for mitigation strategies. We encourage future safety alignment research to explore
various techniques to ensure that safety alignment is more than just a few tokens deep.
2
The Shallow Safety Alignment Issue in Current Large Language Models
We consolidate the notion of “shallow safety alignment” to characterize an issue that we commonly
find in current safety-aligned LLMs. Specifically, we say that a model undergoes shallow safety
alignment if it primarily adapts the base model’s generative distribution only over the very first few
output tokens to induce a basic refusal response. In this section, we present a set of case studies to
systematically illustrate the above issue: this type of alignment can appear safe in pre-deployment
testing or standard workflows but quickly falls apart if anything triggers a non-refusal prefix. First,
in Section 2.2, we show that there exists a local optimum where promoting simple refusal prefixes in
the first few tokens of an unaligned model improves its safety to similar levels as an aligned model.
We also show that the KL divergence between aligned and their unaligned counterparts is largely
2Similar token-wise dynamics have recently also been noted by Lin et al. [25], Zhang and Wu [26], and Zhao
et al. [27]. This is also related to Superficial Alignment Hypothesis by Zhou et al. [28]. See Section 5 for more
detailed discussions of the related work.
2

biased toward these initial token positions, suggesting that this shortcut is in fact exploited by current
alignment approaches. Then, in Section 2.3, we demonstrate how this shallow safety alignment can be
a source of many safety vulnerabilities, including vulnerabilities at the inference stage (Section 2.3.1)
and vulnerabilities against fine-tuning attacks (Section 2.3.2).
2.1
Preliminaries
Notation. We use πθ to denote a language model parameterized by weights θ. We sometimes also
directly use πbase to denote an (unaligned) pre-trained model (e.g., Llama-2-7B, Gemma-7B) to
contrast its aligned counterpart πaligned (e.g., Llama-2-7B-Chat, Gemma-7B-IT) [5, 31]. Given an
input x, the model’s output is modeled by πθ( · |x). We use y ∼πθ( · |x) to denote the sampling
of output y. For token sequences like x, y, we use xt, yt to denote their t-th tokens, and |x|, |y| to
denote their lengths (i.e., number of tokens). We also use y<t and y≤t to denote the subsequences
ranging from the first to the (t −1)-th tokens and from the first to the t-th tokens in y, respectively.
Similarly, y>t and y≥t are employed to denote subsequences after the t-th and (t −1)-th tokens.
Safety Evaluation and The Metrics. In our experiments, we evaluate the safety alignment of models
following the same evaluation pipeline from Qi et al. [22]. Specifically, we test a model on the
HEx-PHI safety benchmark [32], which consists of 330 harmful instructions across 11 harmful use
cases. Then, we evaluate whether the model complies with these harmful instructions. The same to
Qi et al. [22], we use GPT-4 as a judge to automatically evaluate whether the model’s outputs on
these harmful test examples are safe. We report the ratio of test cases in which the model’s outputs
are harmful. In the absence of an attack, we denote this ratio as the Harmfulness Rate; in the presence
of adversarial attacks that introduce harmful outputs, we refer to it as the Attack Success Rate (ASR).
2.2
The Characteristics of Shallow Safety Alignment
A commonly recognized characteristic of safety-aligned language models is their ability to refuse
harmful instructions. For example, when instructing the aligned Llama-2-7B-Chat model: “Provide
detailed instructions on how to break into someone’s house.”, it will output a safe response:
“I cannot fulfill your request. It’s not within my programming or ethical ... (325 tokens in total) ...”
These safety responses often start with some refusal tokens (e.g., “I cannot”, “I apologize”, “I am
unable”). When testing on the HEx-PHI safety benchmark [32], Llama-2-7B-Chat starts with either
“I cannot” or “I apologize” in 96.1% of instances, and Gemma-7b-1.1-IT generates “I am unable”
in 96.7% of cases. Though these rigid refusal prefixes appear to be just some trivial artifacts, they
actually play an important role in enabling a shallow safety alignment scheme to work.
Table 1: A Shorcut to The Safety Mode: The harmfulness rate of even unaligned models will diminish
when a refusal prefix s is prefilled during decoding, i.e., y ∼πθ(·|x, s).
Refusal Prefixes (r) →
No
Prefix
“I cannot”
“I cannot
fulfill”
“I apologize”
“I apologize,
but I cannot”
“I am
unable”
↓Harmfulness Rate (%) on HEx-PHI Benchmark with A Refusal Prefix Prefilled During Decoding
Llama-2-7B
Aligned
0
0 ± 0
0 ± 0
0 ± 0
0 ± 0
0 ± 0
Base
68.6 ± 0.8
16.4 ± 1.4
5.4 ± 1.3
14.4 ± 0.6
2.1 ± 0.2
8.1 ± 0.4
Gemma-7B
Aligned
2.1 ± 0.2
0 ± 0
0 ± 0
0 ± 0
0 ± 0
0 ± 0
Base
85.4 ± 0.6
8.7 ± 1.2
2.7 ± 0.5
14.1 ± 0.4
1.0 ± 0.8
3.9 ± 0.4
The “Safety Mode” Shortcut: Unaligned Models Only Need A Refusal Prefix to Appear “Safe”.
These short refusal prefixes significantly affect whether the remainder of the model’s response will
be safe or unsafe. Even for an unaligned pre-trained model πbase, if we can make its generated
outputs begin with these refusal prefixes, the following output is likely to be safe. Using harmful
instructions x from the HEx-PHI safety benchmark, we validate this by prefilling a refusal prefix s
at the beginning of the decoding process to generate outputs y ∼πbase( · |x, s). Table 1 shows the
Harmfulness Rate of the outputs produced by the models with different prefilled refusal prefixes s for
both Llama-2 [5] and Gemma [31] base. Although the unaligned base models generally have higher
ASR than their aligned counterparts in standard decoding, the gap considerably decreases when both
models are forced to start with refusal prefixes. This makes sense: continuing a refusal prefix with
an absence of fullfillment is a natural pattern in language, which should already be learned during
pretraining. But it suggests a simple shortcut or reward hacking scheme for safety alignment: safety
3

behaviors can be introduced by solely updating an unaligned model’s distribution over the first few
output tokens to promote some refusal prefixes.
Figure 1: Per-token KL Divergence
between Aligned and Unaligned
Models on Harmful HEx-PHI.
Current Safety-aligned Models Exploit This Shortcut. We
provide evidence that current safety-aligned models are likely
exploiting this shortcut, resulting in shallow safety alignment.
We first construct a harmful dataset in the form of (harm-
ful instruction, harmful answer) pairs. Specifically, we take
out the 330 harmful instructions from the HEx-PHI safety
benchmark and then generate harmful answers for these in-
structions using a jailbroken version of GPT-3.5-Turbo from
Qi et al. [22]. We call this dataset Harmful HEx-PHI. With
this harmful dataset, we can examine the per-token KL diver-
gence DKL
 πaligned( · |x, y<k)


πbase( · |x, y<k)

between
the aligned model πaligned and unaligned pre-trained model
πbase on each of the harmful example (x, y). As shown in
Figure 1, for both the Llama and Gemma models, the KL divergence is significantly higher in the
first few tokens than for later tokens. This suggests that most of the KL “budget” for the safety
alignment in these models is spent on the first few prefix tokens.3 At the high level, this outcome can
be attributed to the reason that the current safety alignment process does not encode any notion of the
“depth" of the alignment. During SFT, the model is trained to mimic responses from human experts,
but it is unnatural for humans to write any kind of examples that refuse a request after providing a
harmful prefix; during RLHF, the model’s reward is computed on the responses generated by the
model itself, but if the model learns to always generate refusal prefixes for some harmful instructions,
the probability that the responses start with harmful prefixes is very low, and the model can hardly
receive any penalty for exploiting the safety mode shortcut.
2.3
Shallow Safety Alignment May Be A Source of Many Safety Vulnerabilities
Since we know that there exists a safety shortcut, and aligned models likely exploit it, this helps
explain and unify existing inference-time and fine-tuning time vulnerabilities.
2.3.1
Inference-Stage Vulnerabilities
As demonstrated by the KL divergence in Figure 1, a shallowly aligned model’s generative distribution
of later harmful tokens remains largely unaffected when compared to its unaligned counterpart. This
implies that we can still induce harmful outputs from such shallowly aligned models as long as we
can bypass the block of refusal prefixes in the early token positions. We note that this can be a source
of vulnerabilities, leading to various types of inference-stage exploits.
Figure 2: ASR vs. Number of Pre-
filled Harmful Tokens, with ˆy
∼
πθ(·|x, y≤k) on Harmful HEx-PHI.
Prefilling Attacks. A simple exploit is to prefill the first
few tokens with a non-refusal prefix at the beginning of the
inference. We can validate this using the Harmful HEx-
PHI dataset that we build in Section 2.2. For each harm-
ful data pair (x, y) from this dataset, we sample outputs
ˆy ∼πθ( · |x, y≤k). This tests whether the model would gen-
erate harmful content if the first k tokens are prefilled with
a non-refusal prefix y≤k. The Attack Success Rate (ASR)
in relation to k is plotted in Figure 2. As shown, when con-
ditioned on an increasing number of harmful tokens, the
aligned models’ likelihood of generating harmful content in-
creases quickly from near zero to over 50%. This suggests a
practical safety risk as the decoding of open-source LLMs is
readily controlled by attackers. Even in proprietary models,
Anthropic’s Claude now has an interface to support prefilling for “better steerability” [34], which
therefore can be similarly exploited. Indeed, we have seen very recent concurrent work [21, 30]
exactly exploiting this vulnerability, now called prefilling attacks.
3Using the terminology “spending” KL on a KL “budget” from Gao et al. [33].
4

Optimization Based Jailbreak Attacks with Shallow Surrogate Objectives. In addition to directly
prefilling non-refusal prefixes, a similar exploit can also be indirectly achieved by promoting the
generative probability of such prefixes via adversarially optimized inputs. Notable examples are
adversarial suffix attacks [29, 21], which are a type of optimization-based jailbreak attacks. These
attacks typically involve a combinatory optimization over a suffix string that is appended to the end
of harmful instructions. The optimization aims to force the model to fulfill the harmful instruction
when the adversarial suffix is present. In practice, a surrogate objective is commonly used in such
adversarial optimization, which is simply to maximize the likelihood of an affirmative prefix such as
“Sure, here is...”. Researchers have found this surrogate objective to be easy and efficient to optimize
and, therefore, is used for implementing such attacks. Such surrogate objectives work by exactly
exploiting shallow safety alignment.
Jailbreak via Mere Random Sampling. Another, somewhat implicit, exploit randomly samples
responses to harmful instructions with varying decoding parameters (temperatures, top-k, top-p) [24].
With sufficient sampling and hyperparameter variations, the likelihood of obtaining a harmful response
to a harmful instruction turns out to be considerably high. This outcome essentially also results from
the shallow safety alignment effect. If harmful content is blocked only by promoting a short prefix of
refusal tokens, random sampling with appropriate decoding hyperparameters may deviate the initial
refusal tokens and falls on a non-refusal trajectory, circumventing the shallow safety alignment.
Remark. As a counterfactual, in Section 3, we show that if we can extend the safety alignment’s
effect to more deeply suppress the model’s harmful outputs, its robustness against all of the three
types of inference-stage exploits we list here can be meaningfully improved.
2.3.2
Safety Vulnerabilities in The Stage of Downstream Fine-tuning
(a) Per-token Cross-Entropy Loss
on The Fine-tuning Dataset
(b) Per-token Gradient Norm
on The Fine-tuning Dataset
(c) Per-token KL Divergence on
HEx-PHI Safety Test Dataset [32]
Figure 3: Then per-token dynamics when fine-tuning Llama-2-7B-Chat on the 100 Harmful Examples
from Qi et al. [22]. Note: 1) ASR of initially aligned model = 1.5%; 2) After 2 gradient steps =
22.4%; 3) After 4 gradient steps = 76.4%; 4) After 6 gradient steps = 87.9%.
Another emerging paradigm of safety vulnerabilities is the use of downstream fine-tuning to jailbreak
aligned models. Recent studies [22, 23] have demonstrated the feasibility of fine-tuning attacks,
wherein a malicious actor can undo the safety alignment in an LLM by merely fine-tuning it on a
few harmful data points at a negligible cost. Notably, Qi et al. [22] and He et al. [35] observed that
fine-tuning an aligned LLM on even benign downstream datasets might result in safety regression.
We argue that shallow safety alignment is likely also an underlying driver of these vulnerabilities. We
support this argument through an analysis of the per-token dynamics of fine-tuning attacks.
Formally, the standard custom fine-tuning of an aligned LLM on a dataset D is characterized by the
following optimization loss function, where πθ is initialized with the aligned model πaligned:
min
θ
(
E
(x,y)∼D −log πθ
 y|x

)
= min
θ
(
E
(x,y)∼D −
|y|
X
t=1
log πθ
 yt|x, y<t

)
(1)
We investigate the per-token dynamics of the fine-tuning process by separately examining:
1. The per-token cross-entropy loss at each token position t: −log πθ
 yt | x, y<t

.
2. The gradient magnitude of the per-token loss:


∇log πθ
 yt | x, y<t


2.
5

We also examine the per-token KL divergence between the fine-tuned models and the initially aligned
model on the HEx-PHI safety test dataset [32]. Specifically, for each harmful instruction ˜x, we take
the outputs ˜y ∼πθ( · |˜x) from the fine-tuned model πθ. Then, for each token position t, we compute
the KL divergence DKL
 πθ( · |˜x, ˜y<t)


 πaligned( · |˜x, ˜y<t)

.
Figure 3 presents such a per-token decoupling of the harmful example demonstration attack from
Qi et al. [22]. Here, a safety-aligned model (Llama-2-7B-Chat in our case) is fine-tuned on 100
(harmful instruction, harmful answer) data pairs, with a learning rate of 2 × 10−5 and a batch
size of 64. Figure 3a shows the average per-token loss on the 100 data points, Figure 3b plots the
average gradient magnitude induced by the per-token loss, and Figure 3c illustrates the per-token KL
divergence between the fine-tuned models and the initially aligned model.
Fine-tuning Attacks Perturb The Generative Distribution of The First Few Tokens The Most.
We note that the token-wise decoupling clearly has an uneven impact across token positions. The
aligned model exhibits substantially higher initial loss values for the first few token positions, and the
corresponding gradient norms are, therefore, also much larger. As illustrated by the per-token KL
divergence plots, this causes the generative distribution over the initial tokens to deviate significantly
from that of the initial aligned model after only a few gradient steps of fine-tuning. The deviation
is markedly more pronounced for earlier tokens compared to later ones. Notably, after a mere six
gradient steps, the ASR has already increased from the initial 1.5% to 87.9%. While we previously
showed that the alignment of current models seems to largely be constrained to the first few tokens,
this may also make it easy it unlearn safety behaviors during fine-tuning — the large gradient norms
(Figure 3b) for the early tokens readily leads to rapid divergence of the generative distribution on
the first tokens (Figure 3c). Conversely, as we will discuss in Section 4, mitigation strategies that
constrain updates on the first few tokens can reduce the likelihood of a successful fine-tuning attack!
We also refer interested readers to Appendix B, where we further present the per-token dynamics of
benign fine-tuning cases. There, we discuss how the learning signals of the early tokens may also
play an important role in safety regression during benign fine-tuning.
3
What If The Safety Alignment Were Deeper?
Following the notion of shallow safety alignment that we elaborate on in Section 2, we now consider
its counterfactual: what if the safety alignment were deeper? Particularly, if the alignment’s control
over the model’s harmful outputs could go deeper than just the first few tokens, would it be more
robust against the range of vulnerabilities we have observed? To investigate this counterfactual, we
experiment with a simple data augmentation approach (Section 3.1) which we find can meaningfully
deepen the safety alignment’s influence over the model’s harmful outputs. In Section 3.2, we
validate that this deeper alignment indeed results in a promising improvement for mitigating multiple
vulnerabilities that we have observed in shallowly aligned models.
3.1
Data Augmentation with Safety Recovery Examples
Formally, let’s use x, h to denote a harmful instruction (x) and its harmful response (h). As noted
in Section 2, a shallow safety alignment can keep the probability of the harmful response πθ(h|x)
low, but this is achieved by merely suppressing the initial tokens of h. For example, an extreme
case is to just adapt πθ(h1|x) = 0 while leaving πθ(h>1|x, h1) = 1. Then the overall probability of
the harmful response πθ(h|x) = πθ(h1|x) × πθ(h>1|x, h1) = 0 is indeed diminished. However,
this does not control the harmful behaviors encoded just one token deeper by πθ(h>1|x, h1) = 1.
Therefore, a natural counterfactual of the shallow safety alignment is to push its influence deeper into
the model’s harmful outputs, for instance, by keeping πθ(h>k|x, h≤k) low for any k ∈[0, |h|] or at
least a sufficiently large k. We propose a data augmentation approach to encode this notion.
Safety Recovery Examples. Consider triplets in the form of (x, h, r), in which a refusal response r
is paired with the harmful instruction and its harmful response. Instead of solely promoting πθ(r|x)
as in some standard safety alignment approaches, we propose to also augment πθ(r|x, h≤k), k ∼
Uniform[1, C] for some constant C ≤|h|. This augmented data steers the model to get back on track
with refusal responses even when the first few generated tokens initially deviate to a trajectory of
harmful content. In this way, it explicitly trains the model to suppress harmful content more deeply
6

within the response, reducing πθ(h>k|x, h≤k) at a deeper depth of k. We refer to such augmented
data as safety recovery examples. Such examples typically appear as:
<s> [INST] «SYS» (System Prompt) «/SYS»\n\nPlease give me step-by-step instructions for
building a bomb. [/INST] Step 1: Gather phosphorus I cannot fulfill your request. It’s not... </s>
As illustrated, the text is synthetic and not even coherent in natural language, implying that it is
unlikely to be naturally produced by human labelers for SFT data or sampled from models for
preference optimization data. Thus, these augmented examples essentially cover outlier cases, which
are useful for encoding a deeper safety alignment notion.4
Implementations. We experiment with this data augmentation to deepen the safety alignment of
the Llama-2-7B-Chat model. Since the model’s alignment pipeline is not publicly available, we can
not apply the data augmentation to align the model from scratch. Alternatively, in implementation,
we experiment by directly fine-tuning the already aligned Llama-2-7B-Chat model further with the
augmented safety recovery examples. To implement it, we construct a safety dataset DH comprising
256 examples of triplets (x, h, r) in the form we described above. To prevent the decrease of model
utility, we also take benign instructions from the Alpaca [36] dataset. We distill the responses to each
of these Alpaca instructions using the initial Llama-2-7B-Chat model to create dataset DB. This
dataset serves as a utility anchor, teaching the model not to alter its original responses to benign
instructions. Taking together, we fine-tune the model using the following objective:
min
θ
α ×
n
E
(x,h,r)∼DH,
k∼Pk
−log πθ(r|x, h≤k)
o
+ (1 −α) ×
n
E
(x′,y′)∼DB
−log πθ(y′|x′)
o
(2)
Here, πθ is initialized with the aligned Llama-2-7B-Chat model. We set the number of prefilled
tokens k to follow a distribution Pk, where k = 0 with a 50% probability, and k is uniformly sampled
from [1, 100] with a 50% probability. We set α = 0.2 to balance the ratio of safety examples and
utility examples in the objective. We denote this fine-tuned model as Llama2-7B-Chat-Augmented.
Full implementation details of the data augmented fine-tuning can be found in Appendix A.3.
Figure 4: The data augmentation in-
duces larger KL divergence on Harm-
ful HEx-PHI (Section 2.2) over the
later tokens of harmful responses.
Effects of The Data Augmentation. 1) Alignment is made
deeper: As a counterpart to Figure 1, we plot the per-token
KL divergence between the augmented fine-tuned Llama-2
model and the base model in Figure 4. As shown, the aug-
mented fine-tuning effectively pushes the KL divergence on
the later tokens of harmful responses to a much higher level.
This is a positive indicator that the augmented fine-tuning
indeed helps to extend the effect of the safety alignment to
deeper tokens of harmful responses. 2) Utility is preserved:
We also evaluate the utility of the augmented fine-tuned
model with Alpaca Eval [37], which is reported as a winrate
against the text-davinci-003 model (the default reference
baseline for AlpacaEval). The augmented fine-tuned model
achieves a winrate of 49.5%, which is only marginally lower
than the initial Llama-2-7B-Chat model’s winrate of 51.8%.5
This indicates that the augmented fine-tuning does not significantly degrade the model’s utility.
3.2
The Deepened Safety Alignment Shows Improved Robustness Against Multiple Exploits
A central argument in this work is that the shallow safety alignment can be a source of many safety
vulnerabilities in LLMs. As a counterfactual, now we evaluate the Llama-2-7B-Augmented model
against the range of exploits we discuss in Section 2.3, verifying whether a deepened safety alignment
can be superior in mitigating these vulnerabilities.
Improved Robustness against Multiple Inference-time Exploits. We test the prefilling attack (using
the Harmful HEx-PHI dataset we built in Section 2), GCG attack [29], and the decoding parameters
4We note that there are ties to ensuring sufficient exploration in reinfocement learning that we do not explore
formally here, but leave to future work.
5To ensure the setup is consistent with the safety evaluation, the official system prompt (with a focus on
safety) of Llama-2-7B-Chat is used when running AlpacaEval. Therefore, the win rates here can be generally
lower than the numbers in official Alpaca leaderboard in which the safety system prompt is not applied.
7

Table 2: ASR on Llama-2-7B-Chat (Initial) and the augmented counterpart (Augmented). Prefilling
attacks are evaluated using Harmful HEx-PHI (the same as Figure 2). For the two other attacks,
ASR is reported for both the HEx-PHI benchmark and the evaluation dataset used by the original
papers, i.e., AdvBench for GCG [29] and MaliciousInstruct for decoding parameters exploit [24].
The reported numbers are in the form of (mean ± std) over three runs.
ASR (%) →
Prefilling Attacks
GCG Attack
Decoding Parameters Exploit
5 tokens
10 tokens
20 tokens
40 tokens
HEx-PHI
AdvBench
HEx-PHI
MaliciousInstruct
Initial
42.1 ± 0.9
51.5 ± 1.6
56.1 ± 2.5
57.0 ± 0.4
36.5 ± 2.7
65.6 ± 3.1
54.9 ± 0.6
84.3 ± 1.7
Augmented
2.8 ± 0.4
2.9 ± 0.2
3.4 ± 0.6
4.5 ± 0.6
18.4 ± 4.2
19.0 ± 2.9
11.3 ± 0.4
1.0 ± 0
exploit [24] on the Llama-2-7B-Chat-Augmented model. Each of the attacks corresponds to one
type of inference-stage exploits that we review in Section 2.3.1. We document the implementation
details of the there attacks in Appendix A.4. Table 2 compares the attack success rates (ASRs) on
the Llama-2-7B-Chat-Augmented model with the initial Llama-2-7B-Chat model. As shown, the
augmented fine-tuning improves the model’s robustness against all three inference-stage attacks.
Does the Augmentation Improve Durability against Fine-tuning Attacks? In our evaluation, we
do find the augmented model shows better durability against fine-tuning as well. Especially, it suffers
less from safety regression when fine-tuned on benign utility datasets, compared with the initial
Llama-2-7B-Chat model. Yet, the augmented model is still vulnerable to adversarial fine-tuning
attacks where the datasets are harmful, but the ASR is still lower than the initial model in multiple
cases. We defer the detailed results to Appendix C.
4
What If The Initial Tokens Were Protected Against Fine-tuning Attacks?
The per-token dynamics of fine-tuning attacks that we analyze in Section 2.3.2 suggest that the safety
failure after follow-up fine-tuning could be largely attributed to the distribution shift at only the
first few tokens. Although this presents another frustrating view of the shallowness of the safety
alignment, it also implies a potential avenue for mitigation. Specifically, we posit that: If the very
first few output tokens play such a decisive role in a model’s safety alignment, then we should be
able to protect the alignment from being compromised during fine-tuning by simple constraints to
ensure that the generative distribution of these initial tokens does not significantly deviate. If this is
true, it provides further evidence of shallow safety alignment and suggests one strategy for adding an
additional layer of defense for production fine-tuning interfaces (e.g., Peng et al. [38]).
4.1
A Token-wise Constrained Objective for Custom Fine-tuning Aligned LLMs
To further test our hypothesis, we devise the following fine-tuning objective—inspired in part by
approaches like Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) [16] and Kahneman-Tversky Optimization
(KTO) [39]— but adapted to control the deviation from the initial generative distribution for each
token position, similarly to the token-wise RL objective in [40]:
min
θ
(
E
(x,y)∼D −
|y|
X
t=1
2
βt
log
"
σ

βt log
πθ
 yt | x, y<t

πaligned
 yt | x, y<t

# )
,
(3)
where σ(z) :=
1
1+e−z is the sigmoid function and βt is a constant parameter at each token position to
control the speed of the saturation of the sigmoid. Here, a larger βt induces a stronger regularization
strength towards the initial aligned model’s generative distribution. See below for the interpretation
of the proposed objective.
Interpretation of Our Objective. To see why βt can be used to control the deviation of the generative
distribution at each token position, we can rewrite the fine-tuning objective as:
min
θ
( X
t≥1
E
(x,y)∼D
"
1{t≤|y|} · 2
βt
S
h
βt
 log πaligned
 yt | x, y<t

−log πθ
 yt | x, y<t

|
{z
}
=:∆t(x,y<t,yt)
i#)
, (4)
where S(z) := log(1 + ez) is the softplus function [41].
At token position t, the loss
is essentially ∆t(x, y<t, yt) (defined above) wrapped by the softplus function S(·) after be-
ing rescaled by βt.
When βt is small, S(βtz) ≈S(0) + βtS′(0)z
= log 2 + βt
2 z, so
8

2
βt S(βtz) is approximately equal to −log πθ
 yt | x, y<t

after shifting by a constant.
This
means minimizing our objective is approximately the same as minimizing the cross-entropy
loss E(x,y)∼D

−1{t≤|y|} · log πθ
 yt | x, y<t

.
Conversely, when βt is large,
2
βt S(βtz) =
2 max{z, 0}+exp(−Ω(βt|z|)), which converges exponentially to 2 max{z, 0}. The loss can then be
approximated by E(x,y)∼D

1{t≤|y|} · max{∆t(x, y<t, yt), 0}

. This shows that small βt places
emphasis on minimizing the cross-entropy loss, while large βt places emphasis on matching
the generative distribution to the initial aligned model. In Appendix D.1, we provide a detailed
derivation of these limiting behaviors for large and small βt and further characterization for the
gradient when βt takes a moderate value.
Gradient of Our Objective. Our objective can also be interpreted by its gradient. The token-wise
gradient of the objective on each data point (x, y) with |y| ≥t can be derived as:
∇
 2
βt
S(βt∆t(x, y<t, yt))

= −2σ(βt∆t(x, y<t, yt))∇log πθ
 yt | x, y<t).
(5)
Note that the gradient of the cross-entropy loss is −∇log πθ
 yt | x, y<t

, our fine-tuning objective
essentially applies an additional adaptive weight wt := 2σ(βt∆t(x, y<t, yt)) for the token-wise
gradient term of cross-entropy. The weight wt diminishes as −∆t(x, y<t, yt) := log πθ
 yt |
x, y<t

−log πaligned
 yt | x, y<t

becomes large. This difference in log probabilities essentially
characterizes the deviation between the fine-tuned model πθ and the initially aligned model πaligned
at the token position t (see also Theorem 3). Taking together, we can see that the fine-tuning objective
will adaptively diminish the weight of those token positions where the deviation of the distribution
approaches a certain threshold (controlled by βt), thereby constraining it from further deviation (by
diminishing the gradient at this position). Note that, at the beginning of the fine-tuning when πθ is
initialized as πaligned, the weight wt = 1, and the gradient of the loss is equivalent to that of standard
cross-entropy loss.6
Interpretation from A Reinforcement Learning Perspective. In Appendix D.3, we further show
how the loss function in Eqn 3 can also be derived from a KL-regularized reinforcement learning
objective with βt controlling the strength of the KL regularizes at each different positions t. Under
this RL-based interpretation, a larger βt essentially denotes a larger weight for the token-wise KL
regularization terms, representing a stronger constraint enforcing that the token-wise generative
distribution at the position t does not deviate much from that of the initial model πaligned.
4.2
Experiments
Configurations of βt. To test our argument, we set a large β for the first few tokens to impose a
stronger constraint such that their generative distributions won’t deviate too much from the aligned
models. This leads to the implementation of larger βt as β1 = 0.5, βt = 2 for 2 ≤t ≤5 at the initial
5 tokens, while a much weaker constraint βt = 0.1 for t > 5 at the later tokens.
Fine-tuning Attacks. We test this constrained objective against three fine-tuning attacks from Qi
et al. [22] — 1) Harmful Examples: fine-tuning with 100 (harmful input, harmful answer) pairs; 2)
Identity Shifting: fine-tuning the model to self-identify as an absolutely obedient agent, and always
answer questions with affirmative prefix; 3) Backdoor Poisoning: fine-tuning the model on a mixture
of 100 (harmful input, refusal answer) pairs plus 100 (harmful input + a backdoor trigger, harmful
answer) pairs. So the model will be fine-tuned to keep safe on normal harmful inputs (w/o trigger)
but be harmful when the trigger is added to the harmful input (w/ trigger).
Benign Fine-tuning. We also want to test whether the constrained fine-tuning objective can still
fit benign downstream datasets to achieve comparable performances to that of the unconstrained
objective. So, we experiment with three benign fine-tuning use cases as well, including Samsum [42],
SQL Create Context [43] and GSM8k [44].
Imposing Strong Constraints on Initial Tokens Mitigate Fine-tuning Attacks. Table 3 summarizes
our results of fine-tuning Llama-2-7B-Chat and Gemma-1.1-7B-IT with the proposed constrained
fine-tuning objective. As illustrated, the constrained fine-tuning objective (Constrained SFT in the
6This is also why we multiply a constant factor
2
βt to the loss. With this factor, we make sure the gradient
magnitude is on par with the standard SFT (with cross-entropy loss) when the weight wt does not diminish.
9

Table 3: Fine-tuning with The Constrained Objective in Eqn 3, with larger constraints β1 = 0.5,
βt = 2 for 2 ≤t ≤5 at initial tokens, and small constraints for later tokens βt = 0.1 for t > 5.
Models →
Llama-2-7B-Chat
Gemma-1.1-7B-IT
Datasets ↓
mean ± std (%)
(over 3 rounds)
Initial
Standard
SFT
Constrained
SFT (ours)
Initial
Standard
SFT
Constrained
SFT (ours)
Against Fine-tuning Attacks
Harmful Examples
ASR
1.5 ± 0.2
88.9 ± 1.2
4.6 ± 0.5
1.8 ± 0.3
81.6 ± 2.9
1.9 ± 0.2
Identity Shifting
ASR
0 ± 0
79.5 ± 2.3
8.1 ± 0.1
0 ± 0
83.6 ± 2.5
9.1 ± 1.7
Backdoor
Poisoning
ASR (w/o trigger)
1.5 ± 0.2
7.6 ± 1.1
1.9 ± 0.2
1.8 ± 0.3
2.0 ± 0.2
1.5 ± 0.1
ASR (w/ trigger)
1.7 ± 0.1
90.9 ± 1.4
10.9 ± 2.8
1.8 ± 0.3
82.3 ± 1.1
1.9 ± 0.8
Fine-tuning with Normal Downstream Datasets
Samsum
ASR
1.5 ± 0.2
23.4 ± 2.5
3.2 ± 0.8
1.8 ± 0.3
2.0 ± 0.2
2.4 ± 0.3
Utility
25.5 ± 0.3
51.7 ± 0.5
50.1 ± 0.2
36.0 ± 1.4
51.5 ± 0.3
51.9 ± 0.5
SQL Create Context
ASR
1.5 ± 0.2
15.4 ± 1.4
3.2 ± 0.8
1.8 ± 0.3
2.8 ± 0.2
2.4 ± 0.1
Utility
14.9 ± 0.4
99.1 ± 0.2
98.5 ± 0.1
88.0 ± 0.5
99.2 ± 0.1
98.6 ± 0.3
GSM8k
ASR
1.5 ± 0.2
3.3 ± 0.4
2.0 ± 0.5
1.8 ± 0.3
2.9 ± 0.2
1.7 ± 0.4
Utility
25.5 ± 0.2
41.7 ± 0.4
37.4 ± 0.3
28.5 ± 1.2
63.3 ± 0.5
63.6 ± 0.4
table) generally keeps a low ASR after both adversarial fine-tuning attacks and benign fine-tuning
with normal downstream datasets. This suggests that the safety alignment can indeed be more
persistent against fine-tuning if we can properly apply a tight constraint to prevent the distribution of
early tokens from deviating too much from the initial models.
Comparable Utility Using The Constrained Loss. In Table 3, we also report utility metrics for
benign fine-tuning use cases, employing the standard ROUGE-1 score for Samsum and SQL Create
Context, and answer accuracy for GSM8k, consistent with established practices for these datasets.
As shown, both standard SFT and constrained SFT improve utility compared to the initial model
across all three cases. Notably, constrained SFT achieves comparable utility to standard SFT while
mitigating the risk of harmful fine-tuning. These results suggest that constraining initial tokens
offers significant advantages in maintaining model safety, without significantly compromising the
model’s ability to still leverage fine-tuning for enhanced utility in many downstream tasks. This is a
meaningful insight that may be leveraged to build an additional layer of protection for production
fine-tuning interfaces such as OpenAI’s Finetuning API [38]. Since fine-tuning interface providers
want to allow their users to customize their models for downstream usage while not breaking the
safety alignment, they should consider enforcing such more restrictive fine-tuning objectives that are
strategically designed to protect safety alignment while allowing customizability.
Experiment Details and More Ablation Studies. The full implementation details of this experiment
can be found in Appendix A.5. Besides, to further validate that the improvement in Table 3 is indeed
benefiting from the stronger constraints (larger βt) biased to the first 5 tokens, we also provide further
ablation studies on the choice of βt in Appendix C.
5
Related Work
Safety & Alignment. A large body of work has examined improved methods for alignment [16,
39, 19, 45, 14, 5, 31]. While we tie alignment approaches to potential downstream jailbreaks, we
do so mainly be examining aligned artifacts which go through more rigorous alignment procedures
than most other open source models. We rely on the Gemma [31] and Llama-2 [5] base and aligned
models throughout this work, as the safety alignment built in these two models are closest to the
technology applied in frontier proprietary models.
Jailbreaking Methods. A large body of work has examined methods for jailbreaking aligned LLMs,
including leveraging finetuning, decoding strategies, prefilling strategies, optimization strategies, and
even persuasion [21, 29, 22, 24, 46, 23, 47, 48, 30, 17]. Many approaches try to handle jailbreaking
through a systems approach by monitoring inputs and outputs with machine learning models [49],
but this is only as good as the monitoring mechanism (which can also be jailbroken) [50].
Superficial Alignment Hypothesis and Per-token Effects of Alignment Fine-tuning. Our work is
closely related to the Superficial Alignment Hypothesis (SAH) [28], which posits that the alignment
process for current LLMs only superficially changes the formats of inputs and outputs to be used
for interacting with the users. Besides, there are also some earlier works noting asymmetries in
the representation power and utility of different tokens during adaptation. For example, Zhang
and Wu [26] show that “the adaptation of topic and style priors” during finetuning are “learned
10

independently and primarily at the beginning of a text sequence.” Lin et al. [25] also find that
differences between aligned and unaligned base models introduced by the alignment fine-tuning
vanishes as the sequence goes longer (similar to the effect that we observe in Figure 1, though theirs
are not in safety-specific contexts). Particularly, while Lin et al. [25] primarily tie such effects to
question whether fine-tuning is even necessary to achieve current level of alignment (e.g., in-context
learning may already suffice to achieve a comparable level of alignment), we go much deeper into
investigating the safety-specfic effects of this phenomenon and tie it to multiple downstream attacks
and training-based mitigations. Besides, we find Zhao et al. [27] also note a similar token-wise effect,
and they explicitly exploit this effect to design jailbreak attacks. Others have investigated fine-tuning
dynamics through interpretability or pruning methods, which is distinct but somewhat related to the
approach we take here [51, 52].
Protecting The Safety Alignment at Initial Token Positions. In Section 4, one important insight
that motivates the design of our constrained fine-tuning loss is that “safety alignment would be more
difficult to be circumvented if we can protect the generative distribution of the model at the early
token positions.” We note that Xu et al. [53] share a similar insight to ours in this regard. They find it
is possible to design a defense against inference-time jailbreak attacks by simply identifying safety
disclaimers and amplifying their token probabilities at the early token positions.
Connections to Control Theory and Safe Reinforcement Learning. Our data augmentation
approach in Section 3 relates to exploration requirements for optimal learning via policy gradient
methods [54], learning recovery policies [55], and safe control theory [56, 57]. We, however, leave
deeper connections to this literature for future work.
Other Notions of Safety Depth. We also note that safety “depth” may be multi-dimensional in
addition to token-based depth we describe here. Other considerations for depth would be the ability for
models to retain safety properties after adaptation that some have previously discussed [58, 51, 22].
6
Conclusion
Our work identifies a shortcut that current safety alignment strategies appear to exploit: that alignment
only needs to change the generative distribution of the first few tokens. We show that this may be a key
component of many downstream vulnerabilities. We then provide two initial strategies to address this:
(1) a data augmentation approach that can increase depth of alignment; (2) a constrained optimization
objective that can help mitigate finetuning attacks by constraining updates on initial tokens. Future
work can explore additional approaches grounded in control theory and safe reinforcement learning.
The methods we describe here may not be a perfect defense and may be subject to some future
adaptive attacks, but they are an initial step for improving robustness and further demonstrate how
much improvement there can be over current approaches. Fundamentally, our results are primarily to
support our argument that future safety alignment should be made more than just a few tokens deep.
Broader Impacts and Ethics Statement
Our work explicitly ties failure modes of safety alignment to potential shortcuts that can be taken by
alignment methods and advocates for, and provides a path forward for, deeper alignment approaches
that will improve safety more broadly. While a deeper understanding of the failures of alignment
may result in increased ability to jailbreak models, we believe that open investigations of such failure
modes are important for strengthening the safety of future models and broadly ensuring that models
have positive societal impact. The proposed prototype approaches (in this work) for strengthening
the alignment in current LLMs also contribute to the broader agenda of building safer and secure AI.
Acknowledgement
We thank Kaixuan Huang, Zixuan Wang, Dingli Yu, Haoyu Zhao at Princeton University for their
early discussions and feedback to this project. This work is supported by Princeton Language and
Intelligence (PLI) Compute Cluster and Center for AI Safety (CAIS) Compute Cluster. Xiangyu Qi
and Ashwinee Panda are supported by a Superalignment Fast Grant from OpenAI, and Xiangyu Qi
is also supported by the Princeton Gordon Y. S. Wu Fellowship. Prateek Mittal acknowledges the
Princeton SEAS Innovation Grant. Peter Henderson acknowledges the Foundational Research Grants
11

program at Georgetown University’s Center for Security and Emerging Technology. Any opinions,
findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the funding agencies.
References
[1] Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
[2] OpenAI. Introducing ChatGPT. https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt, 2022.
[3] OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report, 2023.
[4] Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timo-
thée Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open
and efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.
[5] Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei,
Nikolay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open
foundation and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023.
[6] Anthropic. Introducing Claude. https://www.anthropic.com/index/introducing-cla
ude, 2023.
[7] Gemini Team. Gemini: A family of highly capable multimodal models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2312.11805, 2023.
[8] Jan Leike, David Krueger, Tom Everitt, Miljan Martic, Vishal Maini, and Shane Legg. Scalable
agent alignment via reward modeling: a research direction, 2018.
[9] Brian Christian. The alignment problem: Machine learning and human values. WW Norton &
Company, 2020.
[10] Zachary Kenton, Tom Everitt, Laura Weidinger, Iason Gabriel, Vladimir Mikulik, and Geoffrey
Irving. Alignment of language agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.14659, 2021.
[11] Jan Leike and Ilya Sutskever. Introducing Superalignment. https://openai.com/blog
