warning: The `fitz` API is deprecated and will be removed in future. Use `import pymupdf` instead.
URL: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2502.17420
Type: PDF
Length: 72285 chars (truncated)

--- Content ---

The Geometry of Refusal in Large Language Models:
Concept Cones and Representational Independence
Tom Wollschl¨ager * 1 Jannes Elstner * 1 Simon Geisler 1 2 Vincent Cohen-Addad 3
Stephan G¨unnemann 1 Johannes Gasteiger 3 4
Abstract
The safety alignment of large language mod-
els (LLMs) can be circumvented through adver-
sarially crafted inputs, yet the mechanisms by
which these attacks bypass safety barriers re-
main poorly understood. Prior work suggests
that a single refusal direction in the model’s ac-
tivation space determines whether an LLM re-
fuses a request. In this study, we propose a novel
gradient-based approach to representation engi-
neering and use it to identify refusal directions.
Contrary to prior work, we uncover multiple in-
dependent directions and even multi-dimensional
concept cones that mediate refusal. Moreover,
we show that orthogonality alone does not im-
ply independence under intervention, motivating
the notion of representational independence that
accounts for both linear and non-linear effects.
Using this framework, we identify mechanisti-
cally independent refusal directions. We show
that refusal mechanisms in LLMs are governed
by complex spatial structures and identify func-
tionally independent directions, confirming that
multiple distinct mechanisms drive refusal behav-
ior. Our gradient-based approach uncovers these
mechanisms and can further serve as a foundation
for future work on understanding LLMs.
1. Introduction
The breakthrough of scaling large language models (LLMs)
has led to an unprecedented leap in capabilities, driving
widespread real-world adoption (OpenAI, 2022). However,
*Equal contribution
1School of Computation, Information
& Technology and Munich Data Science Institute, Technical
University of Munich 2Now at Google Research 3Google Re-
search 4Now at Anthropic. Correspondence to: Tom Wollschl¨ager
<tom.wollschlaeger@tum.de>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).
Figure 1. An example of a 3D
concept cone with its basis vec-
tors. All directions in the cone
mediate refusal.
these advancements also
introduce serious risks.
As artificial intelligence
becomes more powerful,
it can be misused for
harmful purposes, such
as attacking critical in-
frastructure or spread-
ing misinformation. En-
suring that these mod-
els remain aligned with
human values has be-
come a crucial research
challenge (Liu et al.,
2023; Schwinn et al.,
2025).
Despite signifi-
cant progress, LLMs, like all machine learning models, re-
main vulnerable to adversarial attacks that can bypass align-
ment mechanisms and induce harmful outputs (Szegedy
et al., 2014; Carlini et al., 2024).
Recent work in interpretability has provided valuable in-
sights into how LLMs encode and process information
(Nanda et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2022; Cunningham et al.,
2023; Heinzerling & Inui, 2024).
Prior studies (Bel-
rose et al., 2023; Gurnee & Tegmark, 2023; Marks &
Tegmark, 2024) suggest that concepts—ranging from sim-
ple to complex—are often encoded linearly in the model’s
residual stream. Methods such as representation engineering
(Zou et al., 2023a) allow researchers to use input prompts to
analyze model behavior by extracting and manipulating such
concepts. However, the mechanisms enabling adversarial
jailbreaks that bypass alignment safeguards remain poorly
understood. Some evidence suggests that refusals to harm-
ful queries are mediated by a single “refusal direction” in
activation space (Arditi et al., 2024), and that jailbreaks rely
on manipulating this direction (Yu et al., 2024), yet these
assumptions require further examination. Understanding re-
fusal mechanisms is crucial, as it has direct implications for
both offensive capabilities—informing more sophisticated
jailbreaks (Huang et al., 2024)—and more importantly de-
veloping robust defensive strategies like improved adversar-
ial training (Yu et al., 2024) and inference–time monitoring.
1
arXiv:2502.17420v2  [cs.LG]  8 Feb 2026

The Geometry of Refusal in Large Language Models
In this work, we go beyond extracting concepts using com-
mon input prompt methods by introducing a novel gradient-
based approach to representation engineering which we use
to investigate the mechanisms underlying refusal behavior
in LLMs. We extract refusal-mediating directions more
effectively, improving both precision and control while min-
imizing unintended side effects, which we demonstrate in
Section 4. Unlike prior work that assumes model refusal is
controlled by a single linear direction, we show in Section 5
that there exist multi-dimensional polyhedral cones which
contain infinite refusal directions; we show an illustrative
example in Figure 1. To further characterize refusal mech-
anisms in language models, we introduce representational
independence, a criterion for identifying directions that re-
main mutually unaffected under intervention, capturing both
linear and non-linear dependencies across layers. In Sec-
tion 6, we demonstrate that even under this strict notion of
independence, multiple complementary refusal directions
exist.1
To summarize, our core contributions are:
• We show that our gradient-based representation engi-
neering can advance general LLM understanding and
specifically demonstrate its efficacy for understanding
refusal mechanisms.
• We introduce representational independence, a practi-
cal framework for characterizing how different inter-
ventions interact within an LLM’s activation space, and
use it to find independent refusal directions.
• We show that rather than a single refusal direction,
there exist multi-dimensional cones in which all direc-
tions mediate refusal.
2. Background
Notation.
Let f : TNseq →∆Nseq×|T| denote a language
model, where ∆|T| is the probability simplex over vocab-
ulary T. Given a prompt p = (t1, . . . , tNseq) ∈TNseq con-
sisting of tokens ti, each token is first embedded: x(0)
i
=
EMBED(ti). The model then processes the token sequence
through L layers, where at each layer l = 1, . . . , L and
token position i the following transformation is applied:
˜x(l)
i
= x(l)
i
+ ATTN(l)(x(l)
1:i), x(l+1)
i
= ˜x(l)
i
+ MLP(˜x(l)
i )
The final residual stream x(L+1)
i
is unembedded to yield log-
its: ℓi = UNEMBED(x(L+1)
i
). The softmax function con-
verts these logits into a probability distribution over tokens:
P(t | t1, . . . , ti) = softmax(ℓi)t. We omit technical details
that are not critical for this work such as LayerNorm.
Extracting refusal directions. Paired prompts of harmful
and harmless requests allow the extraction of a directional
1Resources & code: cs.cit.tum.de/daml/geometry-of-refusal
feature from the model’s residual stream as shown by prior
work (Panickssery et al., 2024; Bolukbasi et al., 2016; Burns
et al., 2024). Recent studies obtain this direction by com-
puting the difference-in-means (DIM) (Panickssery et al.,
2024; Arditi et al., 2024; Stolfo et al., 2024) between model
representations on datasets of harmful prompts Dharm and
harmless prompts Dgood:
v(l)
i
=
1
|Dharm|

X
p′∈Dharm
x(l)
i (p′)

−
1
|Dsafe|

X
p∈Dsafe
x(l)
i (p)


Here, x(l)
i (p) represents the residual stream activations at
position i, layer l for input prompt p.
Adversarial steering attacks. The extracted harmfulness
direction can be used to manipulate the model’s refusal
behavior. With white-box access, an attacker can prompt
the model with harmful queries and suppress activations
in the harmfulness direction, thereby reducing the model’s
probability of refusal. This can be done through directional
ablation of r (where ˆr denotes the unit vector) (Zou et al.,
2023a):
˜x(l)
i
= x(l)
i
−ˆrˆr⊤x(l)
i ,
(1)
which projects the residual stream to a subspace orthogonal
to r, or alternatively through activation subtraction:
ˇx(l)
i
= x(l)
i
−α · ˆr,
(2)
which subtracts a scaled r from the residual stream.We
follow common practice to apply both operations across all
token positions and ablation across all layers while doing
subtraction only at a single layer (Arditi et al., 2024).
3. Related Work
Adversarial attacks for LLMs. Many studies have ex-
plored hand–crafted adversarial techniques, such as persona
modulation (Shah et al., 2023), language modifications (Zhu
et al., 2023), or prompt engineering using repetitions and
persuasive phrasing (Rao et al., 2024). Other works take a
more systematic approach, employing techniques like ge-
netic algorithms and random search (Chen et al., 2024),
discrete optimization over input tokens (Zou et al., 2023b),
or gradient-based methods to identify high-impact pertur-
bations (Geisler et al., 2024). While identifying these vul-
nerabilities enables adversarial fine-tuning (Xhonneux et al.,
2024) or improved training through Reinforcement Learning
with Human Feedback (RLHF), recent works suggest that
robustness remains a challenge (Zou et al., 2023a; Schwinn
et al., 2024; Geisler et al., 2024; Scholten et al., 2025).
Interpretability of LLMs. A parallel line of research fo-
cuses on understanding the internal mechanisms of LLMs,
2

The Geometry of Refusal in Large Language Models
as their natural language outputs provide a unique oppor-
tunity to link internal states to interpretable behaviors. In-
terpretability research has led to the identification of var-
ious “features”—concepts represented by distinct activa-
tion patterns (Cunningham et al., 2023)—as well as “cir-
cuits”, which are subnetworks that implement a specific
function or behavior. Prominent examples are backup cir-
cuits (Nanda et al., 2024) and information mover circuits
(Wang et al., 2022). Many interpretability insights rely on
extracting features using paired inputs with opposing se-
mantics (Burns et al., 2024) and then manipulating residual
stream activations to elicit specific behaviors (Panickssery
et al., 2024). Representation engineering, as proposed by
Zou et al. (2023a), investigates the linear representation of
concepts such as truthfulness, honesty, and fairness in LLMs.
The effectiveness of these methods supports the hypothesis
that many features are encoded linearly in LLMs (Marks
& Tegmark, 2024). These insights allow researchers to pin-
point and manipulate concept representations or specific
circuits, enabling targeted debugging of behaviors, mitigat-
ing biases, and advancing safer, more reliable AI systems.
Understanding Refusal Mechanisms. Recent research
has focused on understanding the mechanisms underlying
refusal behaviors in LLMs. For example, removing safety-
critical neurons has been shown to decrease robustness (Wei
et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024b). Zheng et al. (2024) demon-
strate that adding explicit safety prompts shifts the internal
representation along a harmfulness direction. O’Brien et al.
(2024) propose to use sparse autoencoders to identify latent
features that mediate refusal. The most relevant work to ours
is Arditi et al. (2024), which builds on Zou et al. (2023a)
and examines the representation of refusal in LLMs. Their
work suggests that a single direction in a model’s activation
space determines whether the model accepts or refuses a
request. We challenge this notion by showing that refusal is
mediated through more nuanced mechanisms. Concurrently,
Pan et al. (2025) identify multiple independent refusal direc-
tions, providing more evidence to our findings in Section 6.
While their focus is on representation shifts during safety
finetuning, our work introduces a novel, gradient-based,
top-down discovery approach applicable to any model.
Over-refusal Recent work addresses LLM over-refusal,
where benign queries are rejected by overly strict safety
filters. R¨ottger et al. (2023) (XSTest) and An et al. (2024)
(PHTest) provide benchmarks to quantify false refusal rates,
expanded by Cui et al. (2025)’s OR-Bench. Shi et al. (2024)
attribute this to lexical shortcuts, proposing self-contrastive
decoding for mitigation. Similarly, Li & Liu (2025) high-
light over-defense in prompt injection guards with NotInject
and InjecGuard. Collectively, these studies underscore the
challenge of balancing safety and helpfulness, offering re-
sources to diagnose and mitigate overrefusal.
4. Gradient–based Refusal Directions
Research Question: Can our gradient–based repre-
sentation engineering identify refusal directions?
To investigate the refusal mechanisms in language models,
we propose a gradient-based algorithm that identifies direc-
tions controlling refusal in the model’s activation space. We
refer to it as Refusal Direction Optimization (RDO). Un-
like prior approaches that extract refusal directions using
paired prompts of harmless and harmful instructions (Arditi
et al., 2024), our method leverages gradients to find better
directions instead of solely relying on model activations.
Similar to (Park et al., 2023), we define two key properties
for refusal directions:
Definition 4.1. Refusal Properties:
• Monotonic Scaling: when using the direction for ac-
tivation addition/subtraction ˇx(l)
i
= x(l)
i
+ α · r, the
model’s probability of refusing instructions should
scale monotonically with α.
• Surgical Ablation:
ablating the refusal direction
through projection
˜x(l)
i
= x(l)
i
−ˆrˆr⊤x(l)
i
should
cause the model to answer previously refused harmful
prompts, while preserving normal behavior on harm-
less inputs.
We can encode the desired refusal properties into loss func-
tions, allowing us to find corresponding refusal vectors r
using gradient descent. For the monotonic scaling property,
we train the model to refuse harmless instructions psafe when
running the model f with a modified forward pass fadd(r,l)
in which we add r to the activations at layer l. We mini-
mize the cross-entropy between the model output and target
refusal response trefusal. For the surgical ablation property,
we similarly compute the cross–entropy between a harmful
response target tanswer and the output of a modified forward
pass fablate(r) to make the model respond to harmful instruc-
tions. A key strength of our gradient–based approach is the
ability to control any predefined objective and thus we can
control the extent to which other concepts are affected dur-
ing interventions. For this, we use a retain loss based on the
Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence to ensure that directional
ablation of r on harmless instructions does not change the
model’s output over a target response tretain. Algorithm 1
shows the full training procedure for our refusal directions.
Setup. We construct a dataset of harmless and harmful
prompts from the ALPACA (Taori et al., 2023) and SALAD-
BENCH (Li et al., 2024a) datasets (see Section A.1). An
important consideration for our algorithm is the choice of
targets tanswer and trefusal. Generally, language models differ
in their refusal and response styles, which is why we use
3

The Geometry of Refusal in Large Language Models
Figure 2. Attack success rates of refusal directions for different models. We compare the DIM direction baseline that is extracted from
prompts against our Refusal Direction Optimization for jailbreaking with directional ablation and activation subtraction.
Algorithm 1 Refusal Direction Optimization (RDO)
Input: Frozen model f, scaling coefficient α, addition layer
index ladd, learning rate η, loss weights λabl, λadd, λret, and
data D = {(pharm,i, psafe,i, tanswer,i, trefusal,i, tretain,i)}N
i=1.
Output: Refusal direction r
1: Initialize r randomly
2: while not converged do
3:
Sample batch B ∼D
4:
L ←COMPUTELOSS(r, f, B)
5:
r ←r −η∇rL
6:
r ←r/||r||2
7: end while
1: function COMPUTELOSS(r, f, B)
2:
pharm, psafe, tanswer, trefusal, tretain = B
3:
Lablation = CELOSS(fablate(r)(pharm), tanswer)
4:
Laddition = CELOSS(fadd(αˆr,ladd)(psafe), trefusal)
5:
Lretain = KL(fablate(r)(psafe), f(psafe), tretain)
6:
L = λablLablation + λaddLaddition + λretLretain
7:
return L
model–specific targets rather than generating them via un-
censored LLMs as in Zou et al. (2024). Specifically, we use
the DIM refusal direction to generate our targets, though
any effective attack can work. For the harmful answers
tanswer, we ablate the DIM direction and generate 30 tokens.
Similarly, we use activation addition on harmless instruc-
tions to produce refusal targets trefusal. For helpful answers
on harmless instructions that should be retained tretain, we
generate 29 tokens without intervention. The retain loss
Lretain is applied over the last 30 tokens, such that the last
token of the model’s chat template is included. We detail
hyperparameters and implementation in Section A.
Evaluation. We evaluate our method by training a refusal
direction on various models from the Gemma 2 (Team et al.,
2024), Qwen2.5 (Yang et al., 2024), and Llama-3 (Dubey
et al., 2024) families and compare against the DIM direction
for which we use the same setup as Arditi et al. (2024) but
with our expanded dataset. For a fair comparison, we train
the refusal direction at the same layer that the DIM direction
is extracted from, and during activation addition/subtraction
set the scaling coefficient α to the norm of the DIM direc-
tion. We evaluate the jailbreak Attack Success Rate (ASR)
on JAILBREAKBENCH (Chao et al., 2024) using the STRON-
GREJECT fine–tuned judge (Souly et al., 2024). For in-
ducing refusal via activation addition, we test 128 harmless
instructions sampled from ALPACA using substring match-
ing of common refusal phrases. Model completions for
evaluation are generated using greedy decoding with a max-
imum generation length of 512 tokens.
Does the direction mediate refusal? In Figure 2, we show
that for jailbreaking, our approach is competitive when us-
ing directional ablation and, on average, outperforms DIM
when subtracting the refusal direction. Notably, despite not
being explicitly optimized for subtraction–based attacks,
our direction naturally generalizes to this setting. Figure 10
shows that adding the refusal direction to harmless inputs
induces refusal more effectively with RDO than with DIM,
further indicating that our method manipulates refusal more
effectively.
Is the direction more precise? To measure the side effects
when intervening with the directions we track benchmark
performance. Arditi et al. (2024) show that directional abla-
tion with the DIM direction tends to have little impact on
benchmark performance, except for TruthfulQA (Lin et al.,
2021). In Table 1, we show that RDO impacts TruthfulQA
performance much less severely, reducing the error by 40%
on average. We show the results for more benchmarks in
Section B.3.
We then evaluate the trade–off between safety and over–
4

The Geometry of Refusal in Large Language Models
Table 1. TruthfulQA benchmark performance for directional abla-
tion with the DIM or RDO directions, compared to the baseline
(no intervention). Higher values indicate better performance.
Chat model
DIM
RDO (ours)
Baseline
GEMMA 2 2B
47.8
51.4 (+3.6)
55.8
GEMMA 2 9B
52.8
56.7 (+3.9)
61.1
LLAMA 3 8B
48.7
51.0 (+2.3)
52.8
QWEN 2.5 1.5B
42.9
44.0 (+1.1)
46.5
QWEN 2.5 3B
54.2
54.5 (+0.3)
57.2
QWEN 2.5 7B
58.7
60.0 (+1.3)
63.1
QWEN 2.5 14B
63.3
67.9 (+4.6)
70.8
refusal for RDO and DIM on the XSTest benchmark
(R¨ottger et al., 2023). As detailed in Section G, RDO consis-
tently achieves a higher refusal rate for harmful inputs while
maintaining or reducing the benign over–refusal rate com-
pared to DIM. This means that for any given level of benign
over–refusal, our method refuses more harmful requests,
thereby yielding a uniformly better trade–off.
Is our method versatile? Hyperparameter tuning of the
retain loss weight λret in Algorithm 1 allows for balancing
between attack success and side effects (Section C.2). We
observe that for many models—especially those in the Qwen
2.5 family—the majority of estimated DIM directions have
too high side–effects, rendering it an unsuccessful attack
(Figure 16). Our method is more flexible than previous work
as we can choose the target layer freely while limiting side
effects through the retain loss.
Key Takeaways. Our RDO yields more effective re-
fusal directions with fewer side effects, establishing
that gradient–based representation engineering is an
effective approach for extracting meaningful direc-
tions, while allowing for more modeling freedom
such as incorporating side constraints.
5. Multi-dimensional Refusal Cones
Research Question: Is refusal in LLMs governed by
a single direction, or does it emerge from a more
complex underlying geometry?
We extend RDO to higher dimensions by searching for
regions in activation space where all vectors control re-
fusal behavior. For this, we optimize an orthonormal basis
B = [b1, . . . , bN] spanning an N-dimensional polyhedral
cone RN = {PN
i=1 λibi | λi ≥0}\{0}, where all direc-
tions r ∈RN satisfy the refusal properties (Theorem 4.1).
Since all directions in the cone correspond to the same re-
fusal concept, we also refer to this as a concept cone. The
constraint λi ≥0 ensures that all directions within the
cone consistently strengthen refusal behavior. Without this
constraint, allowing negative coefficients could introduce
opposing effects, reducing the overall effectiveness. En-
forcing orthogonality of the basis vectors prevents finding
co-linear directions. Note that in practice, directions in acti-
vation space cannot be scaled arbitrarily high without model
degeneration, which effectively bounds λi.
Algorithm 2 Refusal Cone Optimization (RCO)
1: Initialize B = [b1, . . . , bn] randomly
2: while not converged do
3:
Sample batch B ∼D
4:
Lsample ←Er∼Sample(B)[COMPUTELOSS(r, f, B)]
5:
Lbasis ←1
n
Pn
i=1 COMPUTELOSS(bi, f, B)
6:
L = Lsample + Lbasis
7:
B ←B −η∇BL
8:
B ←GRAMSCHMIDT(B)
9: end while
1: function SAMPLE(B)
2:
s ∼Unif(x ∈Rn
+ : ||x||2 = 1)
3:
r = Bs
4:
return r
In Algorithm 2, we describe the procedure to find the cone’s
basis vectors. The basis vectors are initialized randomly
and iteratively optimized using projected gradient descent.
We compute the previous losses defined in Algorithm 1 on
Monte Carlo samples from the cone, as well as on the ba-
sis vectors themselves. Computing the loss on the basis
vectors improves both stability and the lower bounds of
the ASR. This is because the basis vectors are the bound-
aries of the cone and thus tend to degrade first. After each
step, we project the basis back onto the cone using the
Gram–Schmidt orthogonalization procedure. Because the
directional ablation operation uses the normalized ˆr rather
than r, sampling convex combinations of the basis vectors
and normalizing them would introduce a bias towards the
basis vectors themselves. Instead, we sample unit vectors in
the cone uniformly to ensure better coverage of the space.
Can we find refusal concept cones? We train cones of in-
creasing dimensionality using the same experimental setup
as described in Section 4. We measure the cone’s effective-
ness in mediating refusal by sampling 256 vectors from each
cone and computing the ASRs of the samples for directional
ablation. We show the results in Figure 3 and confirm that
the directions in the cones have the desired refusal proper-
ties in Figure 20. Notably, we identify refusal–mediating
cones with dimensions up to five across all tested models.
This suggests that the activation space in language models
exhibits a general property where refusal behavior is en-
coded within multi–dimensional cones rather than a single
5

The Geometry of Refusal in Large Language Models
Figure 3. Attack success rate for multi-dimensional cones for Gemma 2, Qwen 2.5 and Llama 3. The cone performance is measured via
the performance of Monte Carlo samples which are depicted as boxplot.
linear direction.
Do larger models contain higher–dimensional cones?
In Figure 4, we evaluate the effect of model size within the
Qwen 2.5 family. We observe that across all model sizes, the
lower bounds of cone performance degrade significantly as
dimensionality increases. In other words, a higher number
of sampled directions have low ASR. Larger models appear
to support higher–dimensional refusal cones. A plausible
explanation is that models with larger residual stream di-
mensions (e.g., 5120 for the 14B model vs. 1536 for the
1.5B model) allow for more distinct and orthogonal direc-
tions that mediate refusal. Finally, in Figure 18, we confirm
that directions sampled from these cones effectively induce
refusal behavior, further supporting the notion that multiple
axes contribute to the model’s refusal decision.
Do different directions uniquely influence refusal?
To further investigate the role of different vectors, we as-
sess whether multiple sampled cone directions influence
the model in complementary ways. Specifically, we sample
varying numbers of directions from Gemma–2–2B’s four–
dimensional refusal cone and, for each prompt, select the
most effective one under directional ablation (more details
in Section A). To ensure a fair comparison, we use temper-
ature sampling with the single–dimension RDO direction
to generate the same number of attacks and similarly select
the most effective instance. We study Gemma 2 2B and
sample from its four–dimensional cone, since performance
degrades significantly for larger dimensions (see Figure 17).
Figure 5 shows that sampling multiple directions leads to
higher ASR compared to sampling with various tempera-
tures in the low–sample regime. For a higher number of
samples, the randomness dominates the success of the at-
tack. However, the higher ASR in the low–sample regime
suggests that different directions capture distinct, comple-
mentary aspects of the refusal mechanism. Additionally,
Figure 19 reveals that ASR increases with cone dimensional-
ity but plateaus at four dimensions. This trend indicates that
higher–dimensional cones offer an advantage over single–
direction manipulation, likely by influencing complemen-
tary mechanisms. The plateau likely occurs because the
model does not support higher–dimensional refusal cones.
Key Takeaways.
We show that refusal mecha-
nisms in LLMs span high–dimensional polyhedral
cones, capturing diverse aspects of refusal behav-
ior.
This highlights their geometric complexity
and demonstrates the effectiveness of our gradient–
based method in identifying intricate structures.
6. Mechanistic Understanding of Directions
Research Question: Are there genuinely indepen-
dent directions that influence a model’s refusal be-
havior? Can we access the discovered refusal direc-
tions through perturbations in the token space?
In the previous section, we demonstrated that refusal be-
havior spans a multi–dimensional cone with infinitely
many directions. However, whether the orthogonal refusal–
mediating basis vectors manipulate independent mecha-
nisms remains an open question. In this section, we conduct
a mechanistic analysis to investigate how these directions
interact within the model’s activation space and whether
they can be directly influenced through input manipulation.
6

The Geometry of Refusal in Large Language Models
Figure 4. Refusal evaluation for different cone dimensions for the Qwen2.5 model family. The cone performance for models with fewer
parameters degrades faster with increasing cone dimension compared to larger models.
Figure 5. ASR for best–of–N sampling using N samples from the
4–dimensional refusal cone of Gemma–2–2B, compared to best–
of–N sampling with temperature T using the single–dimension
RDO.
This allows us to determine whether they are merely latent
properties of the network or actively utilized by the model
in response to specific prompts.
6.1. Representational Independence
We defined the basis vectors of the cones to be orthogonal,
which is often considered an indicator of causal indepen-
dence. The intuition is that if two vectors are orthogonal,
they each influence a third vector without interfering with
the other. Mathematically, for the directions r, v and repre-
sentation x(l)
i
we have:
if rT v = 0 then rT (x(l)
i
−vvT x(l)
i ) = rT x(l)
i .
However, despite this mathematical property, recent work by
Park et al. (2024) suggests that in language models, conclu-
sions about causal independence cannot be drawn using or-
thogonality measured with the Euclidean scalar product. Al-
though their assumptions differ from ours, especially since
they assume a one–to–one mapping from output feature to
direction in activation space, their experiments suggest that
independent directions are almost orthogonal. This moti-
vates a deeper empirical examination of how orthogonal
refusal directions in language models interact in practice.
Are orthogonal directions independent? To explore this,
we first use RDO to identify a direction r that is orthog-
onal to the DIM direction v, i.e., r⊤v = 0. We then
measure how much one direction is influenced when ab-
lating the other direction by monitoring the cosine similarity
cos(λ, µ) =
λ⊤µ
||λ||·||µ|| between the prompt’s representation
in the residual stream x and the directions v and r. Specifi-
cally, we track: cos(r, x(l)
i (pharm)) and cos(v, x(l)
i (pharm))
at the last token position and for all layers l ∈{0, . . . , L}
on 128 harmful instructions in our validation set. Intuitively,
ablating a causally independent direction in earlier layers
should not intervene with the reference direction in later
layers. Otherwise, there is some indirect influence through
the non–linear transformations of the neural network.
The top row of Figure 6 shows how the cosine similarity be-
tween the RDO and DIM directions changes under interven-
tion. The left plot shows the cosine similarity between the
RDO direction and the activations on a normal forward pass
(solid line) and while ablating the DIM direction (dashed
line). The right plot presents the reverse setting. Despite
enforced orthogonality, ablating RDO indirectly reduces the
representation of the DIM direction in the model activations
in the later layers, as measured by cosine similarity. This
effect is reciprocal, suggesting that orthogonality alone does
not guarantee independence throughout the network. In
Figure 21 we show the results for additional models.
7

The Geometry of Refusal in Large Language Models
Figure 6. Influence of representational independence. Figure (a)
shows the cosine similarity between RDO⊥, a refusal direction
orthogonal to DIM, and the model activations in a normal forward
pass (solid line) compared to a forward pass where DIM is ablated
(striped line). Figure (b) shows the reverse scenario. In Figure (c)
and (d) we contrast how the DIM direction and a representationally
independent direction (RepInd) influence each other.
Motivated by this observation, we introduce a stricter notion
of independence: Representational Independence (RepInd):
Definition 6.1. The directions λ, µ ∈Rd are representation-
ally independent (under directional ablation) with respect to
the activations x of a model in a set of layers l ∈L if:
∀l ∈L : cos(x(l), λ) = cos(ˆ˜x(l)
abl(µ), λ)
and cos(x(l), µ) = cos(ˆ˜x(l)
abl(λ), µ),
where ˆ˜x(l)
abl(λ) =

f (l)(ˆ˜x(l−1)
abl(λ)) + ˆ˜x(l−1)
abl(λ)

abl(λ) denotes
the activations at layer l produced from the previous layer’s
already ablated activations with the ablation applied again
after the residual addition.
Instead of relying solely on geometric orthogonality, we
say that two directions are representationally independent
when ablating one of them does not change how strongly
the other is expressed in the model’s activations. Because
we track cosine similarity at every layer, any non–linear
distortions introduced earlier in the network are captured
downstream. Consequently, representational independence
guarantees that—measured by cosine similarity—no lin-
ear, non–linear, or cumulative interaction in the network
increases or decreases how much the other examined direc-
tion is represented.
To enforce this property, we extend Algorithm 1 with an
additional loss term that penalizes changes in cosine sim-
ilarity at the last token position when ablating on harmful
Figure 7. Attack success rate for jailbreaking the model with direc-
tional ablation of representationally independent refusal directions
for different models on JAILBREAKBENCH. Each direction is
representationally independent to all previous directions and the
DIM direction.
instructions:
LRepInd = 1
|L|
X
l∈L
h cos(x(l), r) −cos(ˆ˜x(l)
abl(v), r)
2
+
 cos(x(l), v) −cos(ˆ˜x(l)
abl(r), v)
2i
.
Do independent directions exist? With this extension, we
can find a direction that is RepInd from the DIM direction,
yet still fulfills the refusal properties from Theorem 4.1.
We illustrate the representational independence for Gemma
2 2B in the second row of Figure 6, where we see that
the RepInd and DIM direction barely affect each other’s
representation under directional ablation.
We iteratively search for additional directions that are not
only RepInd to DIM but also of all previously identified
RepInd directions. Despite these strong constraints, we suc-
cessfully identify multiple such directions that maintain an
ASR significantly above random vector intervention (Fig-
ure 7). The ASR declines as you search for more directions,
which could be attributed to the increased difficulty of the
optimization problem due to additional constraints, or that
the models contain a limited number of directions that inde-
pendently contribute to refusal. Nevertheless, these results
show that refusal in LLMs is mediated by multiple inde-
pendent mechanisms, underpinning the idea that refusal
behavior is more nuanced than previously assumed.
Do the directions manipulate different mechanisms?
Representational independence should have causal signifi-
cance in language models, such that ablating different repre-
sentationally independent directions corresponds to manipu-
lating independent mechanisms. For this, we demonstrate
that simultaneously ablating multiple representationally in-
dependent directions yields better performance. Figure 8
8

The Geometry of Refusal in Large Language Models
Figure 8. Compositionally ablating the top–k RepInd directions
compared to ablating the DIM direction
shows that when ablating the top–k RepInd directions for
Gemma 2 2B, the attack success rate increases monoton-
ically with k, even surpassing the DIM baseline for k≥4,
though with diminishing returns beyond this point. In con-
trast, we found that ablating multiple DIM directions ex-
tracted from different layers does not improve performance.
The fact that ablating multiple RepInd directions produces
additive improvements in ASR provides evidence that they
capture different aspects of refusal rather than different man-
ifestations of a single mechanism.
6.2. Manipulation from input
Can we access these directions from the input? Having
found several independent directions that are distinct from
DIM, we investigate whether these directions can ever be
“used” by the model, by checking if they are accessible from
the input or if they live in regions that no combination of
input tokens activates. To this end, we use GCG (Zou et al.,
2023b) to train adversarial suffixes, which are extensions to
the prompts that aim to circumvent the safety alignment. In
addition to the standard cross–entropy loss on an affirmative
target, we add a loss term that incentivizes the suffix to
ablate RepInd–1.
Figure 9. Representation of the
RepInd–1 direction in model ac-
tivations on harmful instructions
before and after adversarial at-
tacks with GCG.
In Figure 9, we show
the cosine similarities
between RepInd–1 and
the model activations on
both harmful prompts
pharm from JAILBREAK-
BENCH and the same
prompts with adversarial
suffixes padv. We observe
that GCG is able to cre-
ate suffixes that signifi-
cantly reduce how much
RepInd–1 is represented.
These suffixes success-
fully jailbreak the model 36% of the time, which is similar
to the ASR of RepInd–1.
Key Takeaways. We demonstrate the ability to
identify independent refusal directions, revealing
that these directions correspond to distinct underly-
ing concepts and can be directly accessed through
input manipulations. This further underscores the
utility of our representational independence frame-
work, which provides a generalizable approach for
analyzing and understanding a wide range of repre-
sentational interventions in LLMs.
7. Limitations
While our work provides new insights into the geometry
of refusal in LLMs, some limitations remain. The refusal
directions we compute are all optimized on the same targets,
which may limit their ability to capture fully distinct mecha-
nisms. Extending our method to incorporate diverse targets
or leveraging reinforcement learning with a judge-based
reward function could help identify additional independent
mechanisms (Geisler et al., 2025). Furthermore, while we
establish the existence of higher-dimensional refusal cones,
we cannot rule out the possibility of other yet-undiscovered
regions in the model that mediate refusal.
8. Conclusion
This work advances the understanding of refusal mecha-
nisms in LLMs by introducing gradient-based representation
engineering as a powerful tool for identifying and analyz-
ing refusal directions. Our method yields more effective
refusal directions with fewer side effects, demonstrating its
viability for extracting meaningful structures while allowing
for greater modeling flexibility. We establish that refusal
behaviors can be better understood via high-dimensional
polyhedral cones in activation space rather than a single lin-
ear direction, highlighting their complex spatial structures.
Additionally, we introduce representational independence
and show that within this space of independent directions
multiple refusal directions exist and correspond to distinct
mechanisms. Our gradient-based representation engineer-
ing approach can be extended to identify various concepts
beyond refusal simply by changing the optimization targets.
The generated findings provide new insights into the ge-
ometry of aligned LLMs, highlighting the importance of
structured, gradient-based approaches in LLM interpretabil-
ity and safety.
Acknowledgements
This project was conducted in collaboration with and sup-
ported by funding from Google Research. We thank Do-
minik Fuchsgruber and Leo Schwinn for feedback on an
early version of the manuscript.
9

The Geometry of Refusal in Large Language Models
Impact Statement
Understanding how refusal mechanisms in language models
work could potentially aid adversaries in developing more
effective attacks. However, our research aims to deepen the
understanding of refusal mechanisms to help the commu-
nity develop more robust and reliable safety systems. By
focusing on open-source models requiring white-box access,
our findings are primarily applicable to improving defensive
capabilities rather than compromising deployed systems.
We believe the positive impact of advancing model align-
ment and safety through better theoretical understanding
outweighs the potential risks, making this research valuable
to share with the research community.
References
An, B., Zhu, S., Zhang, R., Panaitescu-Liess, M.-A., Xu, Y.,
and Huang, F. Automatic pseudo-harmful prompt genera-
tion for evaluating false refusals in large language mod-
els, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.
00598.
Arditi, A., Obeso, O., Syed, A., Paleka, D., Panickssery,
N., Gurnee, W., and Nanda, N. Refusal in language
models is mediated by a single direction, 2024. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.11717.
Belrose, N., Schneider-Joseph, D., Ravfogel, S., Cotterell,
R., Raff, E., and Biderman, S. Leace: Perfect linear
concept erasure in closed form, 2023. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2306.03819.
Bolukbasi, T., Chang, K.-W., Zou, J., Saligrama, V., and
Kalai, A. Man is to computer programmer as woman is
to homemaker? debiasing word embeddings, 2016. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/1607.06520.
Burns, C., Ye, H., Klein, D., and Steinhardt, J. Discov-
ering latent knowledge in language models without su-
pervision, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
2212.03827.
Carlini, N., Nasr, M., Choquette-Choo, C. A., Jagielski, M.,
Gao, I., Awadalla, A., Koh, P. W., Ippolito, D., Lee, K.,
Tramer, F., and Schmidt, L. Are aligned neural networks
adversarially aligned?, 2024. URL https://arxiv.
org/abs/2306.15447.
Chao, P., Debenedetti, E., Robey, A., Andriushchenko, M.,
Croce, F., Sehwag, V., Dobriban, E., Flammarion, N.,
Pappas, G. J., Tram`er, F., Hassani, H., and Wong, E.
Jailbreakbench: An open robustness benchmark for jail-
breaking large language models. In NeurIPS Datasets
and Benchmarks Track, 2024.
Chen, Z., Zhu, J., and Chen, A. Eliciting Offesnive Re-
sponses from Large Language Models: A Genetic Algo-
rithm. Springer, 2024.
Clark, P., Cowhey, I., Etzioni, O., Khot, T., Sabharwal, A.,
Schoenick, C., and Tafjord, O. Think you have solved
question answering? try arc, the ai2 reasoning challenge.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.05457, 2018.
Cobbe, K., Kosaraju, V., Bavarian, M., Chen, M., Jun, H.,
Kaiser, L., Plappert, M., Tworek, J., Hilton, J., Nakano,
R., et al. Training verifiers to solve math word problems.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168, 2021.
Cui, J., Chiang, W.-L., Stoica, I., and Hsieh, C.-J. Or-
bench: An over-refusal benchmark for large language
models, 2025.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
2405.20947.
Cunningham, H., Ewart, A., Riggs, L., Huben, R.,
and Sharkey, L.
Sparse Autoencoders Find Highly
Interpretable Features in Language Models, Octo-
ber 2023.
URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2309.
08600. arXiv:2309.08600 [cs].
Dubey, A., Jauhri, A., Pandey, A., Kadian, A., Al-Dahle,
A., Letman, A., Mathur, A., Schelten, A., Yang, A., Fan,
A., et al. The llama 3 herd of models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2407.21783, 2024.
Fiotto-Kaufman, J., Loftus, A. R., Todd, E., Brinkmann,
J., Juang, C., Pal, K., Rager, C., Mueller, A., Marks, S.,
Sharma, A. S., et al. Nnsight and ndif: Democratizing
access to foundation model internals.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2407.14561, 2024.
Gao, L., Tow, J., Abbasi, B., Biderman, S., Black, S., DiPofi,
A., Foster, C., Golding, L., Hsu, J., Le Noac’h, A., Li,
H., McDonell, K., Muennighoff, N., Ociepa, C., Phang,
J., Reynolds, L., Schoelkopf, H., Skowron, A., Sutawika,
L., Tang, E., Thite, A., Wang, B., Wang, K., and Zou,
A. A framework for few-shot language model evaluation,
07 2024. URL https://zenodo.org/records/
12608602.
Geisler, S., Wollschl¨ager, T., Abdalla, M. H. I., Gasteiger,
J.,
and G¨unnemann,
S.
Attacking Large Lan-
guage Models with Projected Gradient Descent, Febru-
ary 2024.
URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2402.
09154. arXiv:2402.09154 [cs].
Geisler, S., Wollschl¨ager, T., Abdalla, M. H. I., Gasteiger,
J., and G¨unnemann, S. Reinforce adversarial attacks on
large language models: An adaptive, distributional, and
semantic objective, February 2025.
Gurnee, W. and Tegmark, M. Language models represent
space and time. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.02207, 2023.
10

The Geometry of Refusal in Large Language Models
Heinzerling, B. and Inui, K. Monotonic representation of
numeric properties in language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2403.10381, 2024.
Hendrycks, D., Burns, C., Basart, S., Zou, A., Mazeika,
M., Song, D., and Steinhardt, J.
Measuring mas-
sive multitask language understanding. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2009.03300, 2020.
Huang, D.-S., Si, Z., and Pan, Y. (eds.). Advanced Intelligent
Computing Technology and Applications: 20th Interna-
tional Conference, ICIC 2024, Part III, volume 14864
of Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer Nature
Singapore, Singapore, 2024. ISBN 978-981-97-5587-5
978-981-97-5588-2. doi: 10.1007/978-981-97-5588-2.
URL https://link.springer.com/10.1007/
978-981-97-5588-2.
Li, H. and Liu, X. Injecguard: Benchmarking and mitigating
over-defense in prompt injection guardrail models, 2025.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.22770.
Li, L., Dong, B., Wang, R., Hu, X., Zuo, W., Lin, D., Qiao,
Y., and Shao, J. Salad-bench: A hierarchical and com-
prehensive safety benchmark for large language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.05044, 2024a.
Li, T., Wang, Z., Liu, W., Wu, M., Dou, S., Lv, C., Wang,
X., Zheng, X., and Huang, X. Revisiting jailbreaking for
large language models: A representation engineering per-
spective, 2024b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
2401.06824.
Lin, S., Hilton, J., and Evans, O. Truthfulqa: Measuring
how models mimic human falsehoods. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2109.07958, 2021.
Lin, Z., Wang, Z., Tong, Y., Wang, Y., Guo, Y., Wang, Y.,
and Shang, J. Toxicchat: Unveiling hidden challenges
of toxicity detection in real-world user-ai conversation.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.17389, 2023.
Liu, Y., Yao, Y., Ton, J.-F., Zhang, X., Cheng, R. G. H.,
Klochkov, Y., Taufiq, M. F., and Li, H. Trustworthy llms:
A survey and guideline for evaluating large language
models’ alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.05374,
2023.
Marks, S. and Tegmark, M. The geometry of truth: Emer-
gent linear structure in large language model represen-
tations of true/false datasets, 2024. URL https://
arxiv.org/abs/2310.06824.
Nanda, N., Olah, C., Olsson, C., Elhage, N., and
Hume, T.
Attribution patching: Activation patching
at industrial scale.
https://www.neelnanda.
io/mechanistic-interpretability/
attribution-patching,
2024.
Accessed:
2025-01-10.
O’Brien, K., Majercak, D., Fernandes, X., Edgar, R., Chen,
J., Nori, H., Carignan, D., Horvitz, E., and Poursabzi-
Sangde, F. Steering language model refusal with sparse
autoencoders, 2024.
URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/2411.11296.
OpenAI.
Introducing chatgpt, November 2022.
URL
https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt/.
Ac-
cessed: 2025-01-26.
Pan, W., Liu, Z., Chen, Q., Zhou, X., Yu, H., and
Jia, X.
The hidden dimensions of llm alignment:
A multi-dimensional analysis of orthogonal safety di-
rections, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
2502.09674.
Panickssery, N., Gabrieli, N., Schulz, J., Tong, M., Hubinger,
E., and Turner, A. M. Steering Llama 2 via Contrastive
Activation Addition, July 2024. URL http://arxiv.
org/abs/2312.06681. arXiv:2312.06681 [cs].
Park, K., Choe, Y. J., and Veitch, V. The linear represen-
tation hypothesis and the geometry of large language
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.03658, 2023.
Park, K., Choe, Y. J., and Veitch, V. The Linear Represen-
tation Hypothesis and the Geometry of Large Language
Models, July 2024. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
2311.03658. arXiv:2311.03658 [cs].
Rao, A., Vashistha, S., Naik, A., Aditya, S., and
Choudhury, M.
Tricking LLMs into Disobedience:
Formalizing,
Analyzing,
and Detecting Jailbreaks,
March 2024.
URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
2305.14965. arXiv:2305.14965 [cs].
R¨ottger, P., Kirk, H. R., Vidgen, B., Attanasio, G., Bianchi,
F., and Hovy, D. Xstest: A test suite for identifying
exaggerated safety behaviours in large language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.01263, 2023.
Scholten, Y., G¨unnemann, S., and Schwinn, L. A proba-
bilistic perspective on unlearning and alignment for large
language models. In The Thirteenth International Con-
ference on Learning Representations, 2025.
Schwinn, L., Dobre, D., Xhonneux, S., Gidel, G., and
G¨unnemann, S. Soft prompt threats: Attacking safety
alignment and unlearning in open-source LLMs through
the embedding space. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Con-
ference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024.
Schwinn, L., Scholten, Y., Wollschl¨ager, T., Xhonneux,
S., Casper, S., G¨unnemann, S., and Gidel, G.
Ad-
versarial alignment for llms requires simpler, repro-
ducible, and more measurable objectives. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2502.11910, 2025.
11

The Geometry of Refusal in Large Language Models
Shah, R., Feuillade-Montixi, Q., Pour, S., Tagade, A.,
Casper, S., and Rando, J.
Scalable and Transferable
Black-Box Jailbreaks for Language Models via Persona
Modulation, November 2023. URL http://arxiv.
org/abs/2311.03348. arXiv:2311.03348 [cs].
Shi, C., Wang, X., Ge, Q., Gao, S., Yang, X., Gui, T., Zhang,
Q., Huang, X., Zhao, X., and Lin, D. Navigating the
overkill in large language models, 2024. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2401.17633.
Souly, A., Lu, Q., Bowen, D., Trinh, T., Hsieh, E., Pandey,
S., Abbeel, P., Svegliato, J., Emmons, S., Watkins, O.,
and Toyer, S. A strongreject for empty jailbreaks, 2024.
Stolfo, A., Balachandran, V., Yousefi, S., Horvitz, E., and
Nushi, B. Improving instruction-following in language
models through activation steering, 2024. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2410.12877.
Szegedy, C., Zaremba, W., Sutskever, I., Bruna, J., Erhan,
D., Goodfellow, I., and Fergus, R. Intriguing properties of
neural networks, 2014. URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/1312.6199.
Taori, R., Gulrajani, I., Zhang, T., Dubois, Y., Li,
X., Guestrin, C., Liang, P., and Hashimoto, T. B.
Stanford
alpaca:
An
instruction-following
llama
model.
https://github.com/tatsu-lab/
stanford_alpaca, 2023.
Team, G., Riviere, M., Pathak, S., Sessa, P. G., Hardin,
C., Bhupatiraju, S., Hussenot, L., Mesnard, T., Shahri-
ari, B., Ram´e, A., et al. Gemma 2: Improving open
language models at a practical size.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2408.00118, 2024.
Wang, K., Variengien, A., Conmy, A., Shlegeris, B., and
Steinhardt, J. Interpretability in the Wild: a Circuit for
Indirect Object Identification in GPT-2 small, Novem-
ber 2022.
URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2211.
00593. arXiv:2211.00593 [cs].
Wang, W., Tu, Z., Chen, C., Yuan, Y., Huang, J.-t., Jiao,
W., and Lyu, M. R. All languages matter: On the multi-
lingual safety of large language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.00905, 2023.
Wei, B., Huang, K., Huang, Y., Xie, T., Qi, X., Xia, M.,
Mittal, P., Wang, M., and Henderson, P. Assessing the
brittleness of safety alignment via pruning and low-rank
modifications, 2024.
URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/2402.05162.
Xhonneux, S., Sordoni, A., G¨unnemann, S., Gidel, G., and
Schwinn, L. Efficient adversarial training in LLMs with
continuous attacks. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Confer-
ence on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024.
Xie, T., Qi, X., Zeng, Y., Huang, Y., Sehwag, U. M., Huang,
K., He, L., Wei, B.
