warning: The `fitz` API is deprecated and will be removed in future. Use `import pymupdf` instead.
URL: https://aclanthology.org/2026.tacl-1.14.pdf
Type: PDF
Length: 75926 chars (truncated)

--- Content ---

Aligned Probing: Relating Toxic Behavior and Model Internals
Andreas Waldis∗1,2, Vagrant Gautam3, Anne Lauscher4,
Dietrich Klakow3, Iryna Gurevych1
1Ubiquitous Knowledge Processing Lab (UKP Lab), Technical University of Darmstadt, Germany
2Information Systems Research Lab, Lucerne University of Applied Sciences and Arts, Switzerland
3Spoken Language Systems, Saarland University, Germany
4Data Science Group, University of Hamburg, Germany
www.ukp.tu-darmstadt.de
www.hslu.ch
Abstract
Warning: This paper contains offensive text.
We
introduce
aligned
probing,
a
novel
interpretability framework that aligns the
behavior of language models (LMs), based on
their outputs, and their internal representations
(internals). Using this framework, we examine
over 20 OLMo, Llama, and Mistral models,
bridging behavioral and internal perspectives
for toxicity for the first time. Our results show
that LMs strongly encode information about
the toxicity level of inputs and subsequent
outputs, particularly in lower layers. Focusing
on how unique LMs differ offers both correl-
ative and causal evidence that they generate
less toxic output when strongly encoding
information about the input toxicity. We
also highlight the heterogeneity of toxicity,
as model behavior and internals vary across
unique attributes such as Threat. Finally,
four case studies analyzing detoxification,
multi-prompt evaluations, model quantization,
and pre-training dynamics underline the prac-
tical impact of aligned probing with further
concrete insights. Our findings contribute
to a more holistic understanding of LMs,
both within and beyond the context of toxicity.
alignedprobing.github.io
1
Introduction
Language models (LMs) may produce toxic text
that contains hate speech, insults, or vulgar-
ity, even when prompted with innocuous text
(Gehman et al., 2020; de Wynter et al., 2024).
Preventing the generation of such toxic language
is an important part of making LMs safer to use
(Kumar et al., 2023). Efforts in this direction in-
clude analyzing the toxicity of model generations
(Ousidhoum et al., 2021; Hartvigsen et al., 2022),
∗Corresponding author: andreas.waldis@live.com.
the effects of pre-training data (Groeneveld et al.,
2024; Longpre et al., 2024), and model detoxifica-
tion (Lee et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024; Yang et al.,
2024). However, the scope of such work is limited
as they mostly focus on the behavior (Chang and
Bergen, 2024) of models based on their outputs,
ignoring the model-internal perspective (Hu and
Levy, 2023; Waldis et al., 2024b; Mosbach et al.,
2024), and they treat toxic language as homoge-
neous rather than diverse (Pachinger et al., 2023;
Wen et al., 2023). Thus, we lack a methodological
framework to answer the question:
How do LMs encode information about
toxicity, and what is the interplay
between their internals and behavior?
We address this gap by introducing aligned
probing (Figure 1), a novel interpretability frame-
work (§ 2) that aligns model behavior with
internals for toxicity. First, we prompt LMs with
inputs and assess the toxicity of their generated
outputs. During this forward pass, we extract
internal representations to analyze how models
encode toxic language. Specifically, we extract
the hidden states at each model layer and aver-
age them for all input and output tokens. Then,
we use linear probing (Tenney et al., 2019a;
Belinkov, 2022) to estimate the encoded infor-
mation about the toxicity of the input or output.
As we train linear model
