warning: The `fitz` API is deprecated and will be removed in future. Use `import pymupdf` instead.
URL: https://aclanthology.org/2026.tacl-1.14.pdf
Type: PDF
Pattern: correlat|lower layers|less toxic output|causal|Spearman|Pearson (42 matches in 75926 chars)

--- Content ---

1002:...we examine
over 20 OLMo, Llama, and Mistral models,
bridging behavioral and internal perspectives
for toxicity for the first time. Our results show
that LMs strongly encode information about
the toxicity level of inputs and subsequent
outputs, particularly in lower layers. Focusing
on how unique LMs differ offers both correl-
ative and causal evidence that they generate
less toxic output when strongly encoding
information about the input toxicity. We
also highlight the heterogeneity of toxicity,
as model behavior and internals vary across
unique attributes such as Threat. Finally,
four case studies analyzing detoxification,
multi-prompt evalu...
--
4823:...e average internal representations
(internals) of input (hI) and output tokens (hO) at every model layer. Then, we probe how strong these internals
encode input and output toxicity (tI and tO) using four scenarios (Input, Forward, Output, and Backward).
c) We correlate these two perspectives to analyze the interplay of behavior and internals when it comes to toxicity.
specific words. For example, Threats rely on
context, while Sexually Explicit toxicity is fo-
cused on individual words. Using aligned probing
and the RealTo...
--
5507:... 100K+ probing
runs to assess model internals, and then systemat-
ically analyze the interplay between behavior and
internals.
We first examine high-level insights across LMs
(§ 4), and show that LMs strongly encode infor-
mation about the toxicity of text in lower layers.
This provides an alternative perspective to previ-
ous findings that localize toxicity in upper layers
(Lee et al., 2024). We also find that LMs replicate
and amplify toxicity more than humans as they
strongly encode input toxicity, especially when
focused on single words like Profanities.
Next, we analyze individual LMs in detail (§ 5)
and find that less toxic models encode more infor-
mation about input toxicity. We further establish
that this is a causal relationship (§ 6), showing
that LMs are generally less toxic when they
know more about the toxicity of a given in-
put. Finally, four case studies (§ 7) reveal that
toxicity-related internal representations are sig-
nificantly pruned by DPO detoxification, r...
--
7680:...) of the input (I) and the cor-
responding output (O). Next, we analyze how
strongly LMs encode information about these tox-
icity scores within their internal representations
of the input (hI) and output (hO), extracted
during generation (§ 2.2). Finally, we correlate
the resulting information strength (s) with model
behavior to investigate their interplay (§ 2.3).
While this study focuses on toxic text, language
that likely makes people leave a discussion, the
method we present (aligned probing) general-
izes to any text...
--
9014:...cores, we compute two
metrics:
Expected
Maximum
Toxicity
(EMT)
We
compute the maximum toxicity across multiple
generations for a given input (maxOj∈O tOj).
Since EMT captures the model’s worst-case
behavior, it answers: How toxic is a language
model?
Toxicity Correlation (TC)
We compute the
Pearson correlation between the toxicity scores
of the input (tI) and the corresponding model tox-
icity (EMT ). This metric quantifies how input
toxicity relates to generation toxicity, to answer
the question: Do models replicate input...
--
[34 more matches not shown]
